  
Kersten, Mamassian & Knill
Correspondence should be sent to: Daniel Kersten, N218 Elliott Hall, Psychology Depart-
ment, 75 East River Road, Minneapolis, MN 55455, U.S.A..
Email: kersten@umn.edu
 
Perception 26, 171-192 (1997)
 
.
We describe phenomenally strong visual illusions in which the motion of an object's
cast shadow determines the perceived 3D trajectory of the object. Simply adjusting the
motion of a shadow is sufﬁcient to induce dramatically different apparent trajectories
of the object casting the shadow. Using 3D graphics, we report psychophysical results
which show that: 1) the information provided by the motion of an object's shadow
overrides other strong sources of information and perceptual biases, such as the
assumption of constant object size and a general viewpoint; 2) the natural constraint of
shadow darkness plays a role in the interpretation of a moving image patch as a
shadow, but under some conditions even unnatural light shadows can induce apparent
motion in depth of an object; 3) when shadow motion is caused by a moving light
source, the visual system incorrectly interprets the shadow motion as consistent with a
moving object, rather than a moving light source. The results support the hypothesis
that the human visual system incorporates a 
 
stationary light source constraint
 
 in the
perceptual processing of spatial layout of scenes. 
 
Moving Cast Shadows Induce Apparent Motion in 
Depth
 
Daniel Kersten, Pascal Mamassian & David C. Knill
 
Abstract 
 
Introduction
 
1
 
 
 
1.0 Introduction
 
A cast shadow boundary occurs when one object partially blocks the light falling on another
surface
 
1
 
. It has been appreciated at least since the time of Leonardo da Vinci that cast shadows
can provide useful information about the relative depths between two such surfaces. Da Vinci
elucidated the principle relating shadow displacement and the perception of depth in his
advice to artists: “...when representing objects above the eye and on one side--if you wish
them to looked detached from the wall--show, between the shadow on the object and the
shadow it casts, a middle light, so that the body will appear to stand away from the wall.” (da
Vinci, 1970). Figure 1 illustrates how the relative displacement between an object and its cast
shadow in an image provides a useful source of visual information about the spatial layout of
objects. Although the importance of cast shadows for realism in the arts is widely appreciated,
there have been only a few systematic studies of the informativeness of cast shadows for depth
perception. Yonas, Goldsmith and Hallstrom (1978) showed that the location of a cast shadow
can inﬂuence the judged depth and height of an object above a ground plane in observers as
young as three years old. Using computer graphics simulations of relatively complex environ-
ments, Wanger, Ferwerda & Greenberg (1992) found that shadows provided the dominant pic-
torial cue for spatial and scaling tasks as compared with other manipulations which included
texture, projection type, frames of reference, and motion. We know rather little, however,
about the mechanisms by which human vision processes shadows, the strength of cast shadow
 
1.  A cast shadow boundary can result when a surface region is blocked from a light source
either by parts of itself (an 
 
intrinsic shadow
 
 ), or by another object (an 
 
extrinsic shadow
 
). An
 
attached shadow
 
 boundary occurs where the angle between the surface normal and light
source direction changes from acute to obtuse on a single surface. Knill, Mamassian & Ker-
sten (1993) give an account of some of the geometrical properties of shadows.
 Figure 1 about here
 
Introduction
 
2
 
information relative to other depth cues, or in particular the visual function of cast shadows
which are moving.
Cast shadow motion is ubiquitous in everyday scenes where objects are often moving relative
to each other. The visual system must cope with shadow motion either by treating shadow
regions as noise irrelevant to the task of identifying and localizing surfaces, or by using this
information. Moving shadows are used routinely in cartoon animations, video games and
computer graphics suggesting an important role, at least for enhancing realism. But identify-
ing and using cast shadows is a hard theoretical problem, and is exacerbated by the fact that
the cause of a cast shadow is remote from the surface receiving it. Thus it is perhaps not sur-
prising that, as observers, we occasionally misinterpret both moving and static shadows
 
2
 
. One
goal of the research reported here was to seek out conditions under which shadows constitute
a robust source of information about depth that is resistant to conﬂicting cues and high-level
knowledge. A strong illusion of apparent changes in movement can provide a simple phenom-
enal test of an hypothesis, that can be convincing based on observation alone. In this context,
perhaps the simplest question to ask is: Can shadow motion induce apparent motion in depth
even when zero motion ﬂow of the object relative to the background indicates no motion at
all? An afﬁrmative answer to this question does not, by necessity, follow from observations
based on static shadows (e.g. as in Figure 1). Except for an accidental viewpoint (when an
object moves along a ﬁxed line of sight), a change in depth is accompanied by change in the
object’s image position and size. Thus, shadow movement is almost always accompanied by
 
2.  In Rembrandt's well-known painting of the “The Night Watch”, the left hand of the militia
captain casts a shadow onto the coat of his lieutenant. Because this realistic shadow seems
remote from its cause, it can be confused with a “stain” on the coat (William H. Warren, per-
sonal communication; Arnheim, 1954). Moving cast shadows have less ambiguity with stain
or more generally with reﬂectance.
 
Introduction
 
3
 
 
 
motion, in the image, of the casting object. Relative motion is a strong cue to relative depth,
and it is an experimental issue as to whether shadow movement could override the motion
cues (zero position and size change) to induce apparent movement in depth. In a recent study
using a version of what we call the “square-over-checkerboard” scene, we had observers view
a square surface whose image was stationary against a checkerboard background. When a
shadow was moved in a way consistent with the square’s motion along the line of sight,
observers reported an illusion of motion in depth, despite the lack of either image size or posi-
tion change (Kersten, Knill, Mamassian & Bülthoff, 1996). The effect was strongest for a
shadow below, rather than above the object, and for fuzzy rather than sharp shadows. This
simple, yet dramatic, observation indicates that a moving shadow can induce apparent motion
in depth even in the presence of other evidence to the contrary. In the next 4 sections, we
explore the generality of this conclusion, and the constraints that the visual system respects in
making an inference of 3D motion from a shadow trajectory.
In the next section (Section 2), we investigate the generality of the basic effect of cast shadow
motion on apparent depth. In our ﬁrst experiment
 
3
 
 (Experiment 1, Section 2.1), we use the
square-over-checkerboard scene to test whether the shadow has to be dark, rather than (unnat-
urally) light. The perception of depth from motion parallax is contingent on a general, rather
than accidental view of the object against a background. In order to generate animations from
a general viewpoint, and to provide a convenient platform for quantitative measurements, we
developed the “ball-in-a-box” scene which provides the basic stimulus arrangement for all the
subsequent experiments and demonstrations. The ﬁrst demonstration (Demonstration 1, Sec-
 
3.  Empirical observations are reported as either “Demonstrations”, in which the results
describe qualitative observations which all observers see, or “Experiments” which report
quantitative results which address more speciﬁc issues. 
 
Introduction
 
4
 
tion 2.2) shows the effect of eliminating an accidental view of the object relative to its back-
ground. Demonstration 2 (Section 2.3) tests whether the form of an object’s spatial trajectory
can be inﬂuenced by varying the form of the shadow’s trajectory. 
Section 3 studies the relationship between object size and shadow motion. Demonstration 3
(Section 3.1) tests whether an object’s deformation or apparent size can be inﬂuenced simply
by adjusting the motion of the object’s cast shadow. Experiment 2 (Section 3.2) explores how
a change in image size interacts with depth from shadows. When an object moves closer, its
image size increases. Which source of depth information dominates, a change in image size or
shadow displacement? 
A dynamic image is determined by a complex set of interactions between object, illuminant,
and viewer locations. Prior knowledge or estimates of the illumination position could, in prin-
ciple, simplify the computation of depth from moving shadows. Section 4 investigates how the
visual system determines and represents light source location. Experiment 3 (Section 4.1)
tests whether observer’s position settings are consistent with a ﬁxed light source position, and
whether these judgments vary with changes in the shadow properties of contrast and opacity.
The data are consistent with an implicit assumed light source position that differs between
individuals. Experiment 4 (Section 4.2) tests whether an observer’s implicit light source posi-
tion is determined by prior assumptions or by image data. 
In order to arrive at an explanatory principle for our ﬁndings, Section 5 introduces the 
 
station-
ary light source constraint. 
 
We test whether this constraint is used by creating animations of
the ball-in-a-box in which the light source itself is moved to simulate shadow motion and then
test if observers interpret the scene in terms of changes in ball or light source trajectory (Dem-
onstrations 4-7). We conclude, in Section 6, with a general discussion of the problems of com-
 
Shadows affect an object’s 3D trajectory
 
5
 
 
 
puting shadow identity locally, and the global constraints which could possibly be used to
resolve depth ambiguity using moving shadow information.
 
2.0 Shadows affect an object’s 3D trajectory
 
The principle of depth-from-shadows is simple: the closer an object is to its cast shadow in an
image, the closer it should appear in depth to the background surface. Using two types of
scene simulation, this section investigates conditions under which shadow motion can inﬂu-
ence object 3D trajectory, even when other sources of depth information are in conﬂict.
 
2.1 Experiment 1 - Square-over-checkerboard: Dark shadows are more effec-
tive than light shadows.
 
In general, depth perception is determined by multiple cues, including stereo, motion parallax,
and various pictorial cues (Cutting & Vishton, 1995). Typically when an object’s depth
changes, its image shifts and under perspective projection its size changes with respect to the
background. We noted above that, under conditions when object image motion is zero relative
to the background, shadow movement is sufﬁcient to override the strong motion information
that the object depth is not changing (Kersten et al., 1996). In this experiment we provide fur-
ther support for the strength of cast shadows as a depth cue, and speciﬁcally test whether the
depth percept is sensitive to conditions which might affect the perceptual labelling of the puta-
tive shadow as a shadow. In particular, is the percept dependent on the natural condition that
the shadow be darker then the surround?
 
2.1.1 Methods. 
 
We created a motion analog of the demonstration in Figure 1, in which the
shadow cast by a stationary square moves back and forth relative to the square (Figure 2).
Unlike Figure 1, however, the shadow in this experiment had a sharp boundary. Observers
were asked to look at a ﬁxation mark (+) placed on a checkerboard plane which subtended 6.6
 
Shadows affect an object’s 3D trajectory
 
6
 
x 10˚ of visual angle. Viewing distance was 500 mm. At a position 4.1˚ to the right of the ﬁxa-
tion point, a foreground square (2.24˚ x 2.24˚) was superimposed over a shadow of the same
size as the square. (Informal observations had indicated that direct ﬁxation was less likely to
produce an illusion of motion in depth, presumably because of the greater sensitivity to spatial
position changes, or lack thereof, in and near the fovea.) In a 500 msec. animated sequence,
the shadow oscillated for one cycle through a 0.34˚ diagonal displacement from the fore-
ground square. The combined horizontal subtense of the square with the shadow at maximum
displacement was 2.48˚. The foreground square remained stationary throughout the animation.
Observers were asked to indicate whether the foreground square “appeared to move in depth,
away from and then back to the checkerboard background”, or not. Six different types of
shadow were used for the experiment: three “dark” shadows simulated as ﬁlm transparencies
with transmittances of 12, 16, and 36%; and three physically implausible “light” shadows cor-
responding to transmittances of 180, 284, and 394% (i.e. light was added within the shadow).
The background checkerboard had a mean luminance of 17.4 cd/m
 
2
 
 with an 82% contrast
between dark and light squares. Subjects were split into two groups of ten. The order of pre-
sentation of different shadow conditions for one group, in terms of effective transmittance,
was: 16, 284, 12, 394, 36, and 180%. The other group saw the stimuli in the order 284, 16,
394, 12, 180 and 36%. Each subject viewed three series of presentations, making a total of 18
trials. 
 
2.1.2 Results and discussion. 
 
When the shadow was rendered realistically dark, subjects
reported seeing the square move toward and away from the background surface 78% of the
time. When the shadow was implausibly lighter than its background, subjects only reported
seeing the square move in depth 40% of the time. (A Wilcoxon signed rank order test on the
difference between light and dark shadows gave p<0.001). Subjects who perceived the motion
 
Shadows affect an object’s 3D trajectory
 
7
 
 
 
reported that the percept was phenomenally strong and “immediate”. The result clearly shows
an effect of cast shadow motion on observers' perception of 3D motion of an object. 
Note that, for the cases in which observers saw the motion in depth, the motion of the shadow
overrode conﬂicting cues which suggested that the square was stationary: the lack of any
change in size of the square and the lack of any 2D motion of the square in the image. That
these features of the stimulus would suggest object stationarity results from the human visual
system's bias to assume, ﬁrst, that objects do not change size over time (a “constant object size
constraint”), and second, that the viewer is viewing the scene from a non-accidental, or gen-
eral viewpoint (Lowe, 1985; Nakayama, & Shimojo, 1992). The assumption of constant
object size would lead the visual system to interpret the non-changing size of the square as
information that the square was stationary, since any change in depth of a rigid object would
lead to a correlated change in the size of the object's image. The general viewpoint assumption
would lead the system to interpret the lack of any 2D motion of the square also as information
for stationarity, since for almost all viewpoints (except one accidental view in which the
viewer is looking along the direction of motion), motion in depth of an object would cause a
correlated 2D motion of the object's image. The cues for stationarity could well have led to the
result that on 22% of the trials with dark shadows, subjects did not see the square move in
depth. This raises the possibility that elimination of the stationarity cues would lead to greater
effects of cast shadow motion on observers' percepts of 3D motion. Unfortunately, one cannot
remove the effect of the constant object size constraint from the stimulus, since size change,
even if zero, is still a cue. Later in Experiment 2 (Section 3.2), we systematically vary image
size and shadow information. In the present case, we set the size cue change to zero, thus pro-
 Figure 2 about here
 
Shadows affect an object’s 3D trajectory
 
8
 
viding conﬂicting information that the square was not moving in depth. This leaves us with at
least two possibilities to increase the strength of the percept of motion in depth for cast shad-
ows: 1) increase the strength of the shadow information to the extent that it overrides the gen-
eral viewpoint constraint or; 2) remove the effect of the general viewpoint constraint by
moving the object. With respect to the ﬁrst possibility, a shadow with changing penumbral
blur (caused by an extended “panel” light source) is sufﬁcient to induce a robust perception of
apparent motion in depth 100% of the time on initial viewing of the square-over-checkerboard
(Kersten et al., 1996). This is true even with direct ﬁxation of the square patch. When the light
source was a point (as in Experiment 1), the percept was seen, but not 100% of the time. The
second possibility is to remove the effect of the general viewpoint constraint by simply mov-
ing the object, as well as its cast shadow, in the image plane. We do this in the next demonstra-
tion using a ball-in-a-box scene.
 
2.2 Demonstration 1 - Ball-in-a-box: Phenomenally strong illusion of motion in 
depth with accidental view removed
 
We generated a 3D graphics simulation which we call the ball-in-a-box animation (Figure 3),
in which we simulated a ball moving inside a box in such a way that it followed a diagonal tra-
jectory in the image plane. In addition to removing the accidental view, the ball-in-a-box pro-
vides us with a straightforward way of measuring apparent 3D location of an object in
Experiments 2, 3 and 4. As in Experiment 1, the size of the object's image, in this case that of
a ball, remained ﬁxed throughout the animation.
 Figure 3 about here
 
Shadows affect an object’s 3D trajectory
 
9
 
 
 
2.2.1 Methods. 
 
A ball was placed in a small open box, rendered in perspective projection and
viewed from an elevation of 22˚ relative to the ﬂoor of the box. Only three sides of the box
were visible. The bottom had a checkerboard texture (square tiles of alternate gray). (A check-
erboard pattern allows the experimental manipulation of both shadow opacity and contrast-- a
property which is exploited later in Experiment 3.) The viewpoint was offset slightly to the
right, as shown in Figure 3. Each animation was created in two stages: ﬁrst, we rendered a
scene with a moving ball without cast shadows. Second, we independently added the ball's
cast shadow to the images in an animation, so that we could manipulate the motion of the
shadow independently of the ball's motion. The shading on the ball was generated by simulat-
ing a light source at inﬁnity with a slant of 63˚ degrees relative to the ﬂoor of the box. The ball
moved in a linear trajectory in the image at an angle tilted by 22˚ from the horizontal. Its speed
varied sinusoidally (period = 4 sec), so that the ball repeated its motion back and forth
between its left- and right-most positions in the image. The shadow moved so that it remained
vertically below the ball in the image. Only the distance between the shadow and the ball var-
ied as the shadow and ball moved. The demonstration animations were recorded on videotape,
and observers were shown the taped animations. All of the Demonstrations (1-7) were devel-
oped with Alias|Wavefront’s
 
™
 
 The Advanced Visualizer
 
™
 
 on a Silicon Graphics Worksta-
tion.
There were two different animation sequences: In the ﬁrst, the ball's cast shadow followed a
diagonal trajectory in the image, parallel and nearly identical to that of the ball's image (end-
ing up at the position shown in Figure 3b); in the second, it followed a horizontal trajectory
(ending up at the position shown in Figure 3c). 
 
Shadows affect an object’s 3D trajectory
 
10
 
2.2.2 Results and discussion. 
 
Despite the fact that the ball's image remained the same size
and had an identical trajectory in the image plane in both animations, all observers experi-
enced the striking percept of seeing the ball rise above the checkerboard ﬂoor when the
shadow trajectory was horizontal, and recede smoothly in depth along the ﬂoor when the slope
of the shadow trajectory matched that of the ball. Because the size of the ball's image
remained ﬁxed, it is clear that the apparent depth from the moving cast shadow was sufﬁcient
to override the constant size constraint. 
 
2.3 Demonstration 2: Non-linear shadow trajectory induces the illusion of a 
non-linear object trajectory
 
The second demonstration explores the versatility of a shadow movement to inﬂuence the spa-
tial trajectory of the casting object by testing whether a non-linear shadow trajectory can
induce an apparently non-linear spatial trajectory of the ball.
 
2.3.1 Methods. 
 
We modiﬁed the ball-in-a-box animations in the following way: the shadow
was given a non-linear motion trajectory in which it initially touched the ball's image, moved
towards the front of the box, at mid-trajectory returned to touch the ball's image, and then
swung to the front again (see Figure 4a). The ball's image moved in the same straight, diago-
nal trajectory as before.
 
2.3.2 Results and discussion. 
 
All observers reported seeing the ball as moving in a non-linear
3D trajectory in which the ball appeared to come forward, retreat in depth, and then come for-
ward again, as it moved from left to right in the box. Moreover, the observers reported seeing
a singularity, or bounce, in the path of the ball when the shadow touched the ball's image and
 Figure 4 about here
 
Shadows interact with object size
 
11
 
 
 
changed direction. Observers saw the bounce despite the fact that the ball's velocity in the
image was smooth at that point.
The above ball-in-a-box demonstrations (1 & 2) show that cast shadows can be remarkably
effective and versatile in their effects on spatial layout. They can directly inﬂuence the per-
ceived form of the spatial trajectory of an object. Related experiments have shown that cast
shadows have further versatility in that they can affect apparent rigidity and shape of an object
(Bülthoff, Kersten, & Bülthoff, 1994). 
 
3.0 Shadows interact with object size 
 
Simple geometry shows that the image size of an object is proportional to its object size, and
inversely proportional to distance. This section investigates how depth-from-shadows inﬂu-
ence apparent object size (Demonstration 3, Section 3.1), and how a change in image size
inﬂuences apparent depth (Experiment 2, Section 3.2).
 
3.1 Demonstration 3: Apparent depth produced by cast shadows induces 
apparent size change.
 
If observers have an implicit perceptual assumption that objects do not change physical size,
one would predict that when the slope of the shadow trajectory matched the ball, the ball
would appear to grow in size as it recedes in depth. Indeed, several of our observers reported
this perception in Demonstration 1. Yonas et al. (1978) found that static size judgments in
adults were inﬂuenced by apparent depth induced by cast shadow position. With a moving
object, however, the object’s identity clearly remains unchanged and thus poses a stiffer con-
straint on object size. In the next animation, we increased perspective convergence by length-
ening the box to see whether the ball’s shadow could induce sufﬁcient apparent depth change
of the ball to affect its perceived size.
 
Shadows interact with object size
 
12
 
3.1.1 Methods. 
 
The stimulus speciﬁcations for Demonstration 3 were similar to those of
Demonstration 1, except that the length of the box in world coordinates was tripled (Figure 5).
For constant ball size, the image should decrease in size by about 50% if it were indeed reced-
ing to the back of the box. However, as before, the image of the ball was kept constant. The
ball made a full excursion (in the image) from the lower left corner of the box to the upper
right corner. 
 
3.1.2 Results and discussion. 
 
When the trajectory of the shadow matched the ball, all observ-
ers reported seeing the ball apparently inﬂating as it moved to the back of the box, and then
shrinking as it moved forward. When the shadow trajectory was horizontal, the ball appeared
to remain ﬁxed in size, although some observers reported seeing a small apparent size change,
perhaps due to the fact that increased height in the picture is associated with increased depth.
 
3.2 Experiment 2: Depth-from-shadows vs. image size change
 
In this experiment, we measured the apparent position of the ball-in-a-box as a function of
both cast shadow slope and size change of the image of the ball. It might be the case that the
shadow-induced location change we observed in Demonstration 1 is the result of the lack of
salience of a zero size change as a cue to depth. If this is the case, we might expect that if we
change the image size of the ball as it moves, this information would dominate the shadow
cue. To investigate this issue, we manipulated the information provided by each cue in both
consistent and conﬂicting ways.
 
3.2.1 Methods. 
 
A total of twelve observers participated in this study. Eight of these observers
were undergraduate students from the University of Minnesota, paid for the time spent in the
 Figure 5 about here
 
Shadows interact with object size
 
13
 
 
 
experiment. Two other observers were recruited within the vision laboratory, and the last two
observers were the ﬁrst two authors. Except for the authors, all subjects were naive regarding
the purposes of the study. All observers had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
A realistic three-dimensional scene was simulated as described in Demonstration 1 (Section
2.2.1 Methods). The objects of the scene had their positions updated 30 times per second, and
were displayed on a 19-inch high-resolution (1280x1024 pixels) monitor. The observer looked
at the monitor monocularly behind a reduction screen. Head-movements were restricted by
the use of a chin-rest, and the lights of the room were turned off.
The box was deeper than wide (9 x 6 tiles), and was simulated to be 150 mm deep, 100 mm
wide, and 55 mm high; the center of its bottom was 330 mm in front and 130 mm below the
viewpoint, and the plane of the bottom was slanted by 22 deg towards the viewer. The shaded
ball had a diameter of 18 mm. The cast shadow was rendered as a transparent elliptical patch
such that the intensity of the tiles covered by the shadow was reduced by 20 per cent. The
shading on the ball was computed from a ﬁxed light source positioned at inﬁnity, the direction
of the light rays being perpendicular to the bottom of the box (therefore slanted from the verti-
cal by an angle of 22 deg towards the viewer).
The ball was given an oscillating motion along a linear trajectory in the image plane (the tilt of
the trajectory relative to the horizontal was 33 deg). The shadow was given a similar oscillat-
ing motion, but the tilt of its trajectory was manipulated between trials. At the left-most posi-
tion of the ball, the shadow was always touching the ball, but at the right-most position, the
distance between the ball and its shadow varied according to the ﬁrst independent variable
named shado
w slope. The shadow slope varied between zero and one: a value of zero referred
to a horizontal shadow trajectory, while a value of one referred to a slope identical to the slope
 
Shadows interact with object size
 
14
 
of the ball trajectory (thereby consistent with a ball moving on the bottom of the box). The
slopes were 0.1, 0.42, 0.68, and 0.9. Figure 4b shows a schematic illustrating how shadow
slopes varied (slopes are shown are not exact). The second independent variable was the
degree by which the ball and its shadow were shrinking. This variable was named size change
and also varied between zero and one: a value of zero corresponded to no change of size and a
value of one was consistent with a ball moving on the bottom of the box (a value of one corre-
sponded to a shrinking of the ball image by 29 per cent from one end to the other of its trajec-
tory). Four levels were selected for each of these two variables, chosen such that for two
consecutive values, the right-most position of the ball would be equi-distant in 3-D space. The
two variables were manipulated independently, their values being either equal or different,
providing respectively either consistent
 or conﬂicting information about the spatial location of
the ball in the box.
Observers were requested to follow the ball with their eyes for a full cycle of the ball trajec-
tory (from left to right, and back to left). Once the ball reached again its left-most position, a
red line (horizontal relative to the ﬂoor) was displayed on the right side of the box. The task of
the subject was then to adjust the height of this line (shown in Figures 3b and c, and schemat-
ically in Figure 6 ) to the perceived height
 of the center of the ball relative to the bottom of the
box, for the right-most position of the ball trajectory. Subjects adjusted the height of the line
by moving the computer's mouse and indicated a match by pressing the mouse button. Before
running the experiment, the subject ran four practice trials for which the shadow and size cues
were always consistent. Thereafter, the subject ran 8 repeated trials for each of the 16 condi-
tions, all randomized within two consecutive blocks.
 Figure 6 about here
 
Shadows interact with object size
 
15
 
 
 
3.2.2 Results and discussion. 
 
Figure 7 shows data from four observers in which perceived
height is plotted as a function of size change. If size change vetoed shadow slope information,
we would expect all four shadow conditions to lie on the same line. This was not the case for
any of the observers. For all but two observers (who ignored size change as a cue to spatial
location), both cues contributed to the perceived height. However, the individual differences
between subjects were large, similar to what has previously been reported in studies involving
two conﬂicting sources of information (cf. Dosher, Sperling and Wurst, 1986). To analyze the
contribution of each cue to the perceived location of the ball, we performed an analysis of
variance for each subject. A main effect of either the shadow slope or the size change variable
would indicate a signiﬁcant contribution of the corresponding cue for the evaluation of the
ball position. Moreover, an interaction between these two variables would indicate that the
information from the two cues does not merely accumulate, but rather is being combined in a
non-linear way.
We divided the twelve subjects into four groups according to the signiﬁcant effects of their
ANOVAs, under an alpha level of 0.05. Data from four observers, representative of these four
groups, are illustrated in Figure 7 (panels a-d), and were characterized by: (a) a main effect of
both independent variables and no interaction; (b) a main effect of both independent variables
and a signiﬁcant interaction; (c) a main effect of shadow slope and an interaction of this vari-
able with size change, but no main effect of size change alone; and (d) only a signiﬁcant main
effect of shadow slope.
 
 
 
The distribution of the observers within the four groups was as fol-
lows: six subjects (including the ﬁrst author) in group (a), two subjects (including the second
author) in group (b), two subjects in group (c), and two subjects in group (d). For two subjects
 Figure 7 about here
 
Implicit light source position
 
16
 
in group (a), the interaction between shadow slope and size change was almost signiﬁcant
(F(9, 112) = 1.96, p = 0.051, and F(9, 112) = 1.93, p = 0.056), so that under a laxer criterion,
the population of group (b) would be doubled.
A careful analysis of the data from observers in group (c) showed that the main effect of size
change was actually annihilated by the interaction effect (see Figure 7c). The effect of size
change on the perceived height of the ball was different when the shadow slope was 0.9 than
for the other levels of shadow slope. In a post-experiment interview, these observers claimed
that at some occasions the ball seemed “to grow as it moved to the back of the box”, consistent
with the observation of Demonstration 3. This perceived inﬂation of the ball might well occur
when the cast shadow trajectory was consistent with a ball almost on the bottom of the box
(shadow slope = 0.9) while the size of the ball stayed roughly the same (size change = 0.1),
and account for the differential performance between observers from group (c) and those from
group (b)
 
4
 
. 
The main conclusion is that for all observers, cast shadow information was a strong and
salient cue for spatial location, even when a size change of the ball’s image indicated a con-
ﬂicting spatial location.
 
4.0 Implicit light source position
 
Like many other monocular cues, the relative displacement of an object's image and its cast
shadow provides theoretically ambiguous information for spatial layout. In order to interpret
 
4.  A reasonable interpretation can also be advanced for the lack of main effect of size change
for the observers in group (d). Several subjects complained that the stimulus “didn't look
right”, even though they were usually unable to report what was wrong. As a consequence,
some of these subjects might have chosen (voluntarily or not) to attend only to the most salient
cue, which turned out to be the moving cast shadow in our experiment.
 
Implicit light source position
 
17
 
 
 
the cues, the visual system must use other information about the scene and make prior
assumptions about the world. Since cast shadow displacement is a function of both object
position and light source position (Figure 8), the visual system must make implicit assump-
tions, or inferences from image data, about the position of the light source creating the shad-
ows in order to infer the spatial positions of the casting objects. In this section, we present
experimental data which reveal the nature of the information and prior assumptions about
light source position which the visual system brings to bear on the interpretation of cast
shadow motion.
 
4.1 Experiment 3: Consistency of apparent position judgments with varying 
shadow opacity and contrast.
 
Figure 1 suggests that, at least when no information about multiple light sources is provided in
an image, the visual system relies on the assumption of a single light source (a constraint sim-
ilar to the light source from above constraint used to explain certain effects in the perception
of shape from shading (Gibson, 1950; Ramachandran, 1988)). In this experiment, we wanted
to know whether the spatial percepts are consistent with an implicit light source position for
different shadow trajectories over trials, and to what extent the judgments relate to the actual
light position. We also wanted to know how apparent ball height in the ball-in-a-box depends
on the photometric properties of the shadow. Experiment 1 showed that light shadows were
less effective than dark shadows in producing apparent motion in depth of a stationary square.
Does a similar result hold for a moving ball in a box? We had observers make settings of
apparent ball height for the simulation described in Demonstration 1, with the slope of the
shadow trajectory (Figure 4b), the shadow opacity and contrast as independent variables.
 Figure 8 about here
 
Implicit light source position
 
18
 
4.1.1 Methods. 
 
Three subjects viewed the ball-in-a-box animations as described in Demon-
stration 1 and Experiment 2. The box was now 132 x 132 mm (6 x 6 tiles) and was viewed
from a point 355 mm from the center of the ﬂoor of the box at an angle of 22˚ relative to the
horizontal. The viewpoint was also 132 mm vertically above and 330 mm horizontally from
the center of the box ﬂoor. The screen width of the front of the box was 190 mm or 30˚ of
visual angle. The ball’s image size was 2.8˚ (16 mm in screen coordinates) and never changed
during the animation. The vertical and horizontal sweep amplitudes of the ball were 32 mm
and 79 mm in screen coordinates. 
The main independent variable was the slope of the shadow trajectory which was either 0.0,
0.38, 0.71 or 1.0, where 0 corresponds to a horizontal trajectory, and 1 to a trajectory that
matches that of the ball (Figure 4b). In terms of angle relative to the screen horizontal, these
slopes corresponded to 0, 8.5, 16, or 22 degrees. The four shadow slopes in the experiment
correspond to 20 mm steps in world coordinates in depth along the box ﬂoor. In addition to the
shadow slope, we manipulated two photometric variables deﬁning the shadow. Because the
shadow was projected on a checkerboard, and not on a surface of uniform reﬂectance, the
shadow was deﬁned by two luminances which were speciﬁed in terms of opacity, 
 
P
 
 and con-
trast 
 
C
 
. Let 
 
B
 
1
 
 and 
 
B
 
2
 
 represent the luminances of the checkerboard without the shadow patch,
and 
 
S
 
1
 
 and 
 
S
 
2
 
 the two luminances of the shadow patch. 
 
S
 
1
 
 and 
 
S
 
2
 
 are determined by the fol-
lowing equations:
For  1 P 0<<–,
S1 S2– C 1 P+()× B1 B2–()×=
S1 S2+1 P+() B1 B2+()× 2P–=
For   0 P 1<<
S1 S2– C 1 P–()× B1 B2–()×=
S1 S2+1 P–() B1 B2+()×=
 
Implicit light source position
 
19
 
 
 
The opacity dimension determined the overall darkness of the shadow. A positive opacity
served to decrease the brightness of the shadow. On the other hand, a negative opacity
produced a bright patch in the image, inconsistent with a plausible shadow. Opacities were: -1,
-.0.66, -.33, 0, 0.33, 0.66, 1. The contrast variable determined the consistency of the
luminances inside and outside the shadow along the shadow boundary. Again, a positive value
corresponded to a natural shadow, while a negative value produced a patch in the image
inconsistent with the checkerboard colors. The unshadowed dark and light squares of the
checkerboard were 15 and 36 cd/m
 
2
 
, respectively.
As in Experiment 2, subjects were given the task of interactively adjusting a line along the
right wall (see again Figures 3b and c, and Figure 6) to match the apparent height of the mid-
dle of the ball at the right-most point of its trajectory. The motion of the ball and its shadow
continued throughout the course of a trial. The order of the 84 conditions was randomized.
The three subjects each made 8 settings for each of the conditions.
 
4.1.2 Results and discussion. 
 
Of the three factors, only shadow slope produced a main effect
(p<0.001; p>0.1 for contrast and opacity). Figure 9 shows ball height as a function of opacity
for a contrast of -1 (Figure 9a) and +1 (Figure 9b) for one observer.
 
 
 
Observers’ settings of
ball height did not depend on the photometric properties of the shadow (the shadow was invis-
ible for a contrast of +1, and opacity of zero, Figure 9b). Further, there were no signiﬁcant
interactions between the three conditions when the zero opacity condition (no visible shadow)
was excluded. 
 Figure 9 about here
 
Implicit light source position
 
20
 
How consistent are observers’ settings with a ﬁxed light source position? Figure 10 shows
results obtained for three observers for the natural shadow condition corresponding to a trans-
parent dark shadow (contrast = 1 and opacity = 0.66). The height estimates of all three sub-
jects varied systematically with the slope of the shadow trajectory: smaller slopes,
corresponding to larger divergences between the shadow and the ball, resulted in larger height
estimates. This reﬂects differences in the perceived 3D motion of the ball between that of
receding along the ﬂoor (for large slopes) to that of rising above the ﬂoor (for small slopes). If
the observers based their setting on the actual light source position (which was at inﬁnity), the
settings would have fallen on the solid lines shown in the plots. While this was a good ﬁt for
only one observer (subject WB), we were able to obtain a better ﬁt to each subject's data by
ﬁnding what would amount to a perceptually implicit ﬁxed light source position for the sub-
ject. In terms of distance (mm) from the middle of the checkerboard ﬂoor and slant (deg) with
the ﬂoor, the light positions which ﬁt the data best were: (419 mm, 60.8˚); (105 mm, 50.4˚);
and, (67 mm, 46.8˚) for observers WB, GDA, and PB, respectively. These ﬁts are shown with
dashed lines. Observers behaved as if they had fabricated a ﬁxed illumination arrangement
with which to interpret the scene. Any such fabrication, however, would have to have been
unconscious, for when queried after the experiment as to where the light source was, observ-
ers claimed to have not thought about it.
 
4.2 Experiment 4: Is effective light source direction determined by prior 
assumptions or image data?
 
The data from the previous experiment (Experiment 3) suggest that the visual system uses a
strategy in which it effectively accounts for light source position when interpreting cast
shadow motion over different shadow trajectories. The question remains as to how the human
 Figure 10 about here
 
Implicit light source position
 
21
 
 
 
visual system incorporates knowledge of light source position in generating percepts of 3D
object motion from cast shadow motion. In this experiment, we tested whether subjects'
implicit light source direction is determined by the shading information on the ball or a prior
bias. 
 
4.2.1 Methods. 
 
We ran the same ball-in-a-box experiment used for Experiment 3 but with
three different shading conditions for the ball, corresponding to three different, ﬁxed light
source positions. 40 subjects were split into 3 groups (13, 13 and 14). Each group was shown
a different shading pattern, corresponding to being illuminated by a light source from one of
three angles above the checkerboard: 60˚, 90˚ and 120˚ (recall that the viewing direction was
22˚ above the checkerboard). All light sources were at inﬁnity. Each observer made 16 settings
at each of four shadow trajectory slopes: 0.1, 0.42, 0.68, and 0.9.
 
4.2.2 Results and discussion. 
 
If observers used the ball's shading to determine a light source
direction for the estimation of 3D object motion from shadow motion, subjects' estimates of
the ball's height at the end of its trajectory should have varied accordingly. The dotted lines in
Figure 11 show theoretical predictions of ball height as a function of shadow slope for the
three illumination angles based on exact knowledge of the light source direction. Figure 11
also shows the perceived height, averaged over all observers for each of the three conditions.
The data show a small effect of illumination direction consistent with observers' usage of
shading information to indicate light source direction. It can be seen from the ﬁgure, however,
that the size of the effect was far from what would be predicted theoretically, suggesting that
in this experiment, a strong prior bias for a default light source position determined perfor-
 Figure 11 about here
 
Stationary light source constraint
 
22
 
mance. Our results, of course, do not rule out the possibility that stronger image information
for light source position, than that provided by the ball's shading, may have a greater inﬂuence
on the subjects' interpretation of cast shadow motion.
 
5.0 Stationary light source constraint
 
In order to explain the perception of motion in depth from moving cast shadows, we conjec-
ture that the visual system assumes that the light source casting a shadow is ﬁxed on the time
scale of the motion. We call this the 
 
stationary light source constraint
 
. The idea is that if
image motion in a scene could be accounted for in terms of either object or light source
motion, the visual system assumes the object is moving, rather than the light source. Consider
the apparent non-linear motion in Demonstration 2. If we ignore for the moment the lack of
change in shading on the ball and elsewhere in the box, as well as the lack of changes in
shadow shape, the non-linear motion of the shadow could be interpreted as due to an appropri-
ately moving light source. Our assumptions, however, leave us with the question of whether
cues elsewhere in the box provide additional information that the light source is not moving.
 
5.1 Demonstrations 4-7: Can the visual system account for a moving light 
source?
 
A test of the stationary light source constraint would be to ﬁnd out whether the visual system
can account for a moving light source in its interpretation of cast shadow motion when appro-
priate information about the motion of the light is provided in a sequence of images. We made
four animations using a moving light source to generate the cast shadows. The animations
were designed so that observers should see qualitatively different object motions if they
assume a ﬁxed light source constraint than if they accounted for the light source motion.
 
Stationary light source constraint
 
23
 
 
 
5.1.1 Methods. 
 
All the animations were based on a realistic 3D simulation of a ball oscillating
in the front plane of the box. The motion of the ball was chosen to give the same image trajec-
tory as was used in the previous ball-in-a-box demonstrations and experiments--moving diag-
onally in the image plane, with no change in image size. Constant image size was achieved
through small continuous adjustments of the 3D size. The simulated trajectory of the ball was
not only the ﬁxed in the image, but was also ﬁxed in 3D for all animations. The previous dem-
onstrations and experiments manipulated the shadow trajectory without varying the lighting
on the rest of the scene. In Demonstrations 4-7, we generated shadows by rendering the scene
with ray-tracing from a moving light source whose motion gave rise to different trajectories
for the cast shadows. In these animations, the continuously changing shading on the ball and
in the room provided information for the motion of the light source. A system which could
effectively discount this motion should see the 
 
same
 
 3D motion of the ball in all the anima-
tions. That is, the system should infer the correct 3D trajectory as speciﬁed by the geometrical
model deﬁning the animations. 
For the ﬁrst of the demonstrations in this section (Demonstration 4), we made two animations
in which the simulated light source motions gave rise to cast shadow trajectories mimicking
those used in Demonstration 1 (one following the ball, the other moving horizontally in the
image). Demonstration 5 was identical to Demonstration 4, except that the spherical ball was
replaced by an ellipsoid. In Demonstration 6, we added further information about the moving
light source by including other stationary objects (vertically elongated parallelepipeds) placed
on the ﬂoor of the box (as also used in Demonstration 7, and shown in Figure 12). Finally, we
generated an animation (Demonstration 7; Figure 12) in which the motion of the light source
caused a non-linear shadow motion which mimicked that of Demonstration 2, but with the
objects of Demonstration 6.
 
Stationary light source constraint
 
24
 
5.1.2 Results and discussion. The four demonstrations support the hypothesis that the visual
system relies on a ﬁxed light source constraint when interpreting shadow motion. For Demon-
stration 4, all observers reported seeing the ball as moving along different 3D trajectories in
the two animations as in Demonstration 1. When asked to compare the perceived object
motions in these animations with those in the animations used for Demonstration 1, all
observers reported that they appeared the same. This suggests that the observers were not able
to incorporate the information for a moving light source into their estimation of object motion.
The result, however, may have arisen either because observers interpreted the changing shad-
ing of the ball as being due to something other than a moving light source or because the
changing shading on the ball and in the room did not provide sufﬁcient information to induce
the percept of a moving light source. In support of the former hypothesis, several observers
reported that the ball appeared to rotate and that the shading on the ball then appeared to be
from markings on the ball's surface. In order to control for this effect, we repeated Demonstra-
tion 4 using an ellipsoidal instead of a spherical ball (Demonstration 5). This led to a correct
interpretation of the shading pattern (the ellipsoid did not appear to rotate); however, the phe-
nomenon remained unchanged--observers still reported seeing different motions for the ellip-
soid in the two animations. The animation for Demonstration 6 included several visible
moving cast shadows for the stationary objects, providing even more information for the
motion of the light source, yet we found no effect on the apparent trajectory of the ball. When
the animation for Demonstration 7 was shown after the animation used in Demonstration 2,
observers reported that their percepts of non-linear 3D motion were similar for both anima-
tions. We cannot rule out the possibility that adding even more information about the presence
 Figure 12 about here
General Discussion
25 
of a moving light source would outweigh the stationary light source constraint; however, taken
together, Demonstrations 4-7 provide strong evidence that the human visual system incorpo-
rates an assumption of a ﬁxed light source in its interpretation of 3D object motion from cast
shadow motion, and that it ignores even clear evidence to the contrary.
6.0 General Discussion
The above results clearly show that cast shadows can be a powerful source of information for
the perception of spatial layout. The importance of cast shadows for human vision, however,
stands in contrast to some standard assumptions about how vision functions. If vision’s pri-
mary jobs are to determine the identity and spatial layout of surfaces and objects, one could
argue that variation of intensity in the image due to illumination should be discounted early in
the visual system. With respect to variations in mean light level, this is certainly consistent
with the function of retinal adaptation. The idea that the visual system also discounts slow
spatial variations in illumination in order to determine surface color has been discussed since
Helmholtz. It can be accomplished through lateral inhibition, and is the basis of a number of
lightness algorithms. However, we can already see a complication in this line of reasoning in
that slow variations in shading can arise due to either illumination or a smooth change in sur-
face shape (Knill & Kersten, 1991a). Proceeding nonetheless, a logical progression is to
assume that cast shadows also be discounted early in visual processing. Consistent with this
strategy, work in computer vision has typically treated shadows as noise, to be ﬁltered out dur-
ing the ﬁrst steps of edge detection (for exceptions, see Waltz, 1972; Shafer, 1985; Kender, J.
R., & Smith, E. M., 1987). This approach, however, has not worked because of the well-
known problems involved in extracting signiﬁcant edges--it is too easy to confuse shadow
boundaries with depth and material changes. The general difﬁculty of discounting shadows
General Discussion
26
early in visual processing raises the possibilities that human visual performance may either
suffer because of it, or perception may in fact use shadow information not only in determining
spatial layout, but also in other high-level tasks such as object recognition. It is not too hard to
ﬁnd examples of the problems shadows pose for human image understanding (e.g. the “stain”
in Rembrandt’s “The Night Watch”, or the Mooney pictures of unfamiliar objects, Moore and
Cavanagh, 1996). However, a couple of recent studies are also consistent with the latter possi-
bility.
Tarr, Kersten & Bülthoff (submitted) have obtained experimental results suggesting that cast
shadows are not simply discounted in a visual recognition task (a same/different judgment of
object identity) and can improve recognition speed. This speed gain, however, comes at a cost-
-a change of illumination direction slows down accurate same judgments when intrinsic cast
shadows are present, but not in the absence of cast shadows. Rensink & Cavanagh (1993)
reported evidence suggesting that cast shadows are rapidly identiﬁed in order to establish
object structures, but then effectively removed so that they are difﬁcult to access in a visual
search task. These results and ours indicate that at some level the visual system must distin-
guish between shadows and other types of boundaries (e.g. shape or reﬂectance). Distinguish-
ing whether an image edge is due to a cast shadow or some other cause, however, is not a
simple computational problem. Solving this problem is even more complex when one realizes
that identiﬁcation of a static cast shadow boundary carries different information than a moving
shadow. Static cast shadow boundaries (unlike specularities) can be treated as surface mark-
ings (e.g. potentially useful for stereopsis and, in cases when only the observer is moving, for
structure-from-motion). In contrast, moving shadows are clearly not surface markings, and
while they pose some of their own problems, we will see below how motion may provide for
General Discussion
27 
their solutions (Section 6.2). What information can be used to distinguish cast shadows from
other intensity gradients for either static or moving shadows?
6.1 Computing shadow identity & local constraints
There are local, highly ambiguous constraints for computing shadow identity. These include
the X-junction constraints of Metelli (1975), fuzziness of the penumbra, weak constancy of
luminance variance and chromaticity values across shadow boundaries (see Funka-Lea, 1995).
Unfortunately, none of these are robust enough to avoid confusing a shadow boundary with
one caused by variations in shape, reﬂectance, or focus. Shadow motion may provide more
reliable information for shadow identity, through averaging of the above local cues, or by pro-
viding more diagnostic information in some instances. An example of the latter is the dynami-
cally changing penumbral blur of an extended light source, which is less likely to be confused
with a material change. Nevertheless, local ambiguity remains and in general, the form and
evolution of optic ﬂow is inﬂuenced by changes in the relative positions of objects and illumi-
nation as well as viewpoint. The effects of illumination in the image can be quite distant from
the image of the object causing it. A change in shape causes a local change in image intensity,
whereas a cast shadow can be caused by an object either unseen or distant from its effect in the
image--the effects of illumination are not just local. 
6.2 Global Constraints
Given the ambiguity of local cues, how are shadows identiﬁed? It would seem that identiﬁca-
tion is a prerequisite to appropriately linking a shadow with its casting object, but the identiﬁ-
cation cannot be made uniquely based on local cues alone. We can gain some insight into this
problem by contrasting the results with the stationary square-over-checkerboard (as in Experi-
ment 1) with the ball-in-a-box. We have seen that apparent motion of the stationary square is
sensitive to the speciﬁcs of shadow properties. Observers are more likely to experience appar-
General Discussion
28
ent depth changes for dark shadows than light, and with fuzzy rather than sharp shadows
(Experiment 1; Kersten et al., 1996). In contrast, we have found that the strength of the ball-
in-a-box illusion persists under a wide variety of manipulations of the shadow. In the ball-in-a-
box simulation of Experiment 3, we found that an object's cast shadow does not have to be
physically reasonable--it can have the wrong contrast polarity or lightness--for observers to
consistently see different motions in depth which depend on shadow trajectory
5. These obser-
vations also stand in contrast to those obtained for the role of shadows in shape judgments in
static images, which show that manipulations of shadow brightness and contrast interfere with
shape perception (Cavanagh & Leclerc, 1989). Why do the ball-in-a-box demonstrations pro-
duce a strong percept of motion in depth, even when several properties of shadows such as
contrast polarity, transparency, and correct shape are wrong?
The robustness of the ball-in-a-box illusions may in fact be a consequence of perception’s
ability to use global constraints which are needed to cope with the complexity and ambiguity
of natural viewing. Speciﬁcally, the robustness of the percept may owe in part to the fact that
dynamic displays contain an important piece of information not available in static displays--
the correlation between the motion of an object and its cast shadow. The detection of a partic-
ular kind of correlated motion could indicate an event category corresponding to an object/
shadow pair. The informativeness of correlated motion as a cue depends on at least two
assumptions: 1) a stationary light source, and 2) a general viewpoint. A stationary light source
constrains the relative image positions of an object and its shadow to be along a line connect-
ing the shadow, object and light source and thus deﬁnes the correlated motion. If the light
5.  We have replaced the shadow with a square transparent surface, as well as a thick coin-like
object. Informal observations suggest that as long as the shadow substitute appears to be on
the ﬂoor of the box, the apparent ball trajectories are similar to those seen with a natural
shadow.
General Discussion
29 
source is at inﬁnity, the line makes a ﬁxed angle in the image, thus an object and its shadow,
while changing in relative distance during motion, are constrained to maintain the same rela-
tive angle. If the light source is at a ﬁnite position, the line sweeps through an angle anchored
to a ﬁxed location in the image plane. 
The assumption of a general viewpoint says that the scene is viewed from a generic, rather
than special or accidental viewpoint
6. The idea that the visual system assumes a general view-
point has been shown to be useful in explaining why humans can make some categorical per-
ceptual inferences as reliably as they do (Nakayama & Shimojo, 1992). For the case of
correlated motion, it is clear that the type of correlated motion we have described for objects
and their shadows is one which would appear in just about any view of the object (assuming
both object and shadow were visible). It is also clear that such motions do not normally arise
from independent motions of objects in the world. Even for objects whose motions are caus-
ally related (e.g. the ends of a rigid baton moving arbitrarily in 3D space), the occurrence of
the speciﬁc type of correlated motion we have described would be rare, and found only under
a limited range of viewpoints. This particular motion path, then, is a reliable indicator that an
6.  To summarize the basic idea, suppose an image feature is detected (e.g. correlated motion
such that two image regions move constrained by a line of ﬁxed orientation) and one wants to
use the information provided by that feature to infer something about the world, say state “A”
(e.g. object/shadow hypothesis). Assumption of a general viewpoint allows one to make such
an inference reliably when the proportion of views giving rise to the feature given one state of
the world (state “A”) is much greater than the proportion of views giving rise to that feature
for other states of the world (“not A”) (Jepson, Richards & Knill, 1996). Expressed in probabi-
listic terms, we require:
When this condition holds, we can say that detection of a feature (correlated motion) reliably
implies the existence of state A of the world. As it turns out, the informativeness of a feature
relies on a weaker version of this rule: the a priori probability of the world state must have a
signiﬁcant non-zero probability (Knill and Kersten, 1991b; Richards and Jepson, 1992). In the
terms of Richards and Jepson (1992), correlated object and shadow image motion would be a
“key” feature for labelling two image regions as being matched object/shadow pairs.
p feature A() p feature notA()»
General Discussion
30
object/shadow pair is present; though, by itself, it does not indicate which image patch corre-
sponds to the object and which to the shadow, nor does it specify where the shadow is.
Shadow identity could be resolved by assuming that the light source is above, and thus the
lower region is the shadow. But we still require knowledge of the shadow location to compute
a unique depth trajectory.
Consider the geometric ambiguities present in the ball-in-a-box animations (Figure 13). To
determine the ball’s location along the line of sight, the visual system requires three pieces of
information: 1) the location of the shadow, 2) the direction of the light source, and 3) the view-
point. The ﬁrst two pieces of information constrain the ball to be on a line between the shadow
and light source. The third speciﬁes a line from the eye through the ball. The intersection of
these two lines determines the ball’s position along the line of sight. We have seen in Experi-
ment 3 that the visual system assumes a ﬁxed, if incorrect light source position, but what
information determines the location of the shadow?
 Local photometric constraints could con-
tribute to labelling a region as a shadow, which is by necessity on the receiving surface. But in
Experiment 3, we found that opaque white shadows, which are photometrically wrong, had no
signiﬁcant effect on the depth illusion. Another source of information is the non-accidental
alignment of the canonical axis of the shadow patch with that of the ﬂoor -- a perpendicular
through the ﬂoor coincides with a perpendicular through the shadow
7. For example, a slant
estimate based on the aspect ratio of the images of a checkerboard square would match that of
7.  See Richards, Jepson, & Feldman, J. (1996) for a discussion of the theoretical basis for this
kind of inference. A second source of information would be the assumption that in the absence
of evidence to the contrary, an object (ersatz shadow) should have support.
 Figure 13 about here
General Discussion
31 
the elliptical shadow patch. An economical explanation for this coincidence is that the opaque
white shadow and ﬂoor are coplanar8.
6.3 Psychophysics of constraints
The previous section underscored the need for non-local computations to integrate cast
shadow motion with object motion. An example of global consistency checking in the box
world is the classic work on the utilization of static shadow contour information by Waltz
(1972). But virtually all biologically motivated computational models of depth perception
(e.g. stereo and motion) rely on local computations. The kind of brain computation required to
support the perceptual processing we have described here resembles a more global process in
which the visual system seeks a logical and probable interpretation of the image based on a
knowledge of how images could be formed from objects, their spatial relations, the illumina-
tion, and viewpoint together with the prior assumptions about the nature of the world (Gre-
gory, 1970; Rock, 1983; Kersten, 1990). Assuming such a framework for visual system
processing suggests a program of psychophysics which we refer to as a “psychophysics of
constraints” (Knill, Kersten & Yuille, 1996). The objects of experimental study become the
nature of the image features used for perception of scene characteristics, the constraints
assumed by the visual system on how such features are generated from real scenes and the
prior constraints assumed on the values of scene characteristics. 
The discussion of Section 6.2 suggests that one can, with a set of quite general prior assump-
tions about the world and the assumption of a general viewpoint, build up a network of infer-
8.  One prediction of this analysis is that ambiguity of the shadow location should reduce the
inﬂuence of a change in shadow trajectory, if the shadow is replaced by an object whose loca-
tion is ambiguous. Although we haven’t formally tested this prediction, we have observed that
replacing the shadow by another ball tends to reduce the apparent trajectory difference
between the horizontal and diagonal conditions of Demonstration 1. The information to place
this second ball, ersatz shadow, on the ﬂoor is weaker than for a patch whose orientation
matches the ﬂoor.
General Discussion
32
ences about the world which one can reliably make from image data, along with a list of the
image features on which they are based. Jepson, Richards and Knill (1996) have proposed a
general framework for modeling this type of inference and have applied it to modeling the
qualitative inferences one can make about object motion. They refer to the qualitative infer-
ences as motion events (e.g. stationary, resting on ground, etc.). Including shadow information
into their framework would seem straightforward, and including relative object and shadow
motion within their system of motion events is a natural direction to take in modeling the
visual interpretation of cast shadow motion. This paper has presented the beginning of such a
program of research to the perception of 3D spatial layout and motion from cast shadow infor-
mation.
General Discussion
33 
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (BNS-9109514), the Max Planck Society and by
the Air Force Ofﬁce for Scientiﬁc Research (AFOSR 90-2074) and NIH (EY09383-01A1). We thank Albert Yonas,
Isabelle Bülthoff, and Deborah Rossen for their comments and suggestions. We also especially thank Heinrich
Bülthoff for providing an environment conducive to the development and expansion of the ideas in this paper. A
number of the resultss described in this paper were ﬁrst reported at the annual meeting of the Association for Re-
search in Vision and Ophthalmology (Kersten, Mamassian & Knill, 1991; Mamassian, Kersten & Knill, 1992). A
brief description of some of the results of Experiments 1, 3 and 4 have been described by Knill, Kersten and Ma-
massian (1996). 
General Discussion
34
References
Arnheim, R. (1954). Art and Visual Perception. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bülthoff, I., Kersten, D., & Bülthoff, H. H. (1994). General lighting can overcome accidental
viewing. (Abstract) Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology. Sarasota, Florida. 
Cavanagh, P., & Leclerc, Y. G. (1989). Shape from shadows. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, Human Perception and Performance, 15, 3-27.
Cutting, J. E., & Vishton, P. M. (1995). Perceiving Layout and Knowing Distances: The Inte-
gration, Relative Potency, and Contextual Use of Different Information about Depth, Percep-
tion of Space and Motion, (pp. 69-117). Perception of Space and Motion, Academic Press,
Inc.
Dosher, B. A., Sperling, G., & Wurst, S. (1986). Trade-offs between stereopsis and proximity
luminance covariance as determinants of perceived 3D structure. Vision Research, 26, 973-
990.
Funka-Lea, G. D. (1995). The Visual Recognition of Shadows by an Active Observer (MS-
CIS-95-11, GRASP LAB 389). Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylva-
nia.
Gibson, J. J. (1950). The Perception of the Visual World. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Gregory, R. L. (1970). The Intelligent Eye. New York: McGraw-Hill Paperbacks.
Gombrich, E. H. (1995) Shadows: The Depiction of Cast Shadows in Western art.
General Discussion
35 
Jepson, A., Richards, W. & Knill, D. (1996). Modal structure and reliable inference. In K.
D.C., & R. W. (Ed.), Perception as Bayesian Inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Kender, J. R., & Smith, E. M. (1987). Shape from darkness: deriving surface information from
dynamic shadows. Proceedings of the First International Conference on Computer Vision.
London, UK. 539-546.
Kersten, D. (1990). Statistical limits to image understanding. In C. Blakemore (Ed.), Vision:
Coding and Efﬁciency. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kersten, D. J., Mamassian, P., & Knill, D. (1991). Moving cast shadows generate illusory
object trajectories. (Abstract). Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 32, 1179.
Kersten, D., Knill, D.C., Mamassian, P. and Bülthoff, I. (1996) Illusory motion from shadows.
Nature, 379, 31.
Knill, D. C., & Kersten, D. (1991a). Apparent surface curvature affects lightness perception.
Nature, 351, 228-230.
Knill, D. C. & Kersten, D. (1991b). Ideal Perceptual Observers for Computation, Psychophys-
ics, and Neural Networks. In R. J. Watt (Ed.), Pattern Recognition by Man and Machine. Mac-
Millan Press.
Knill, D. C., Kersten, D., & Yuille, A. (1996). Introduction: A Bayesian Formulation of Visual
Perception. In Knill D.C. & Richards W. (Eds.), Perception as Bayesian Inference (Chap. 0).
Cambridge University Press.
General Discussion
36
Knill, D. C., Kersten, D., & Mamassian, P. (1996). Implications of a Bayesian Formation. In
Knill D.C. & Richards W. (Eds.), Perception as Bayesian Inference  (Chap. 6). Cambridge
University Press.
Knill, D. C., Mamassian, P., & Kersten, D. (1993). The geometry of shadows. Computer and
Information Sciences Technical Report (TR 93-47). University of Minnesota.
Lowe, D. G. (1985). Perceptual Organization and Visual Recognition. Boston, MA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Mamassian, P., Knill, D.C. and Kersten, D.J. (1992). Interaction of cast shadow and change of
size. Perception, 21, Suppl. 2, 48. (Abstract). ECVP 1992, Pisa, Italy.
Mamassian, P., Kersten, D.J. and Knill, D.C. (1992). Spatial layout from cast shadows. Inves-
tigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 33, 1332. (Abstract). Paper presented at ARVO
1992, Sarasota, Florida.
Metelli, F. (1975). Shadows without penumbra. In S. Ertel, L. Kemmler, & L. Stadler (Ed.),
Gestaltentheorie in der modernen psychologie (pp. 200-209). Darmstadt: Dietrich Steinkopff.
Moore, C. and Cavanagh, P. (1996) Discriminating shadow and object regions in 2-tone
images, Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science (Supplemental), 37 (3), S193.
Nakayama, K., & Shimojo, S. (1992). Experiencing and perceiving visual surfaces. Science,
257, 1357-1363.
Ramachandran, V. S. (1988). Perception of shape from shading. Nature, 331, 163-166.
General Discussion
37 
Rensink, R. & Cavanagh, P. (1993). Processing of shadows at preattentive levels. (Abstract))
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 34, 1288.
Richards, W., Jepson, A., & Feldman, J. (1996). Priors, preferences and categorical percepts.
In D. C. Knill & W. W. Richards (Eds.), Perception as Bayesian Inference. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Richards, W. & Jepson, A. (1992). What makes a good feature? (C.B.I.P. Paper 72). M.I.T.,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Rock, I. (1983). The Logic of Perception. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press.
Shafer, S. A. (1985). Shadows and Silhouettes in Computer Vision . Boston, Massachusetts:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Tarr, M., Kersten, D., & Bülthoff, H. H. (manuscript). Why the visual recognition system
might encode the effects of illumination.
da Vinci, L. (1970). Notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci. New York: Dover Publications, Inc.
Waltz, D. L. (1972). Understanding line drawings of scenes with shadows. In P. Winston
(Ed.), The Psychology of Computer Vision New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wanger, L. R., Ferwerda, J. A. & Greenberg, D. P. (1992). Perceiving spatial relationships in
computer-generated images. IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications, 11-58.
Yonas, A., Goldsmith L.T. & Hallstrom J. L. (1978). Development of sensitivity to informa-
tion provided by cast shadows in pictures. Perception, 7, 333-341.
General Discussion
38
Figure Captions
Figure 1. Increasing the displacement between the cast shadows and the three foreground
squares produces an impression of increasing depth (from left to right) relative to the back-
ground checkerboard. In this ﬁgure, the penumbra is fuzzy and is the same for all three shad-
ows. In all of the experiments and demonstrations described in the rest of this paper, the
shadows are sharp, with no penumbrae.
Figure 2. The square-over-checkerboard stimulus used in Experiment 1. Observers ﬁxated the
cross and judged whether the square gray patch appeared to move in depth when only its
shadow moved. The shadow moved diagonally down and to the left and then back towards the
square patch as shown by the arrow.
Figure 3. Three frames from animations made with the ball-in-a-box simulations for Demon-
stration 1. Panel a shows the left-most positions of the ball and shadow, for the ﬁrst frame, in
both horizontal and vertical shadow trajectory animations. Panel b shows the right-most posi-
tions for the diagonal shadow trajectory, and panel c shows the right-most position for the hor-
izontal shadow trajectory, both for the last frames. The ball appears to rise above the box ﬂoor
for the horizontal trajectory, but to remain on the ﬂoor for the diagonal trajectory. Experiments
2, 3 and 4 used the same basic arrangement.
Figure 4a & b. Panel 4a shows a schematic time-lapse diagram of four frames from the anima-
tion used for Demonstration 2 (the non-linear motion). The shadow trajectory was artiﬁcially
moved, leaving all other properties of the image, including the brightness of the ball and box,
ﬁxed. Observers reported the ball appearing to bounce at the third position from the left shown
in the diagram. Panel 4b illustrates how shadow trajectories were varied in Experiments 2, 3,
and 4. See the text for the actual values of the trajectory slopes used in each experiment. Solid
General Discussion
39 
arrows indicate the trajectory of the ball (constant in all the animations), and dashed arrows
indicate the trajectories of its shadow.
Figure 5. Three frames from animations made with the longer ball-in-a-box for Demonstration
2. Panel a shows the starting position. As in Fig. 3, panels b & c show the extreme right posi-
tion of the ball for the horizontal and diagonal shadow trajectories, respectively. In these static
images, the effect of the shadow on the apparent size of the ball is small, but noticeable. In the
dynamic case with diagonal trajectory, the ball has the striking appearance of inﬂating as it
moves from left to right. For the horizontal trajectory, the ball appears to remain the same size.
Figure 6. A side view of the box used in Experiment 2. The observer adjusted the height of a
horizontal bar to the perceived height of the center of the ball relative to the bottom of the box
(the cursor is shown in Figure 3b&c). The two cues were the position cast by the ball on the
bottom of the box, and the changing size of the ball’s image as the ball was moving in the box.
(Drawing not to scale).
Figure 7. Perceived height as a function of object size change and shadow slope for four
observers in Experiment 2. (a) Accumulation of the two cues. (b) Non-linear interaction of the
two cues. (c) Signiﬁcant interaction but no main effect of size change. (d) Size change vetoed
by cast shadow cue.
Figure 8. The displacement ∆S between an object and its shadow can be produced either by a
change in light source position, ∆L or by a change in depth of the object, ∆D.
Figure 9. The top (a) and bottom (b) panels show the apparent ball height settings as a func-
tion of opacity for shadow contrasts of -1 and +1, respectively for observer GD in Experiment
3. There is no measurable effect of opacity for either contrast condition. Unnatural white
General Discussion
40
“shadows” (negative opacity), and reverse contrast “shadows” (negative contrast) were as
effective as natural shadows. For a contrast of +1, and opacity of 0, the shadow is invisible,
and the settings converge at an intermediate height. Error bars are ±1 S.E..
Figure 10. Perceived height above the checkerboard ﬂoor of the ball, in the coordinates of the
3D simulated world, as a function of the shadow slope for Experiment 3. Data are shown for
three subjects. Each point is the mean of 8 measurements. Error bars indicate ±1 S.E. of the
mean. As the shadow's trajectory slope goes from zero (horizontal) to one (identical to ball),
the apparent peak height of the ball falls. The solid line shows the physically correct setting
based on the light source direction used to render the scene. The dashed lines show ﬁts to the
data for a model in which it is assumed that each subject bases his or her estimate of the object
trajectory on an implicit ﬁxed light source position. 
Figure 11. Perceived height of the ball above the checkerboard ﬂoor as a function of shadow
slope and light source direction for Experiment 4. Dotted lines show results for a theoretical
observer which accurately estimates the light source directions and uses these to calculate 3D
object motion from cast shadow motion. The mean height estimates for the three groups of
subjects are shown by the open symbols connected by solid lines. Subjects' mean response
curves cluster around what would be predicted for a single intermediate, but inaccurate light
source position. Error bars indicate ±1 S.E. of the mean.
Figure 12. The bottom panel shows a time-lapse diagram of the approximate shadow positions
for Demonstration 7. The top panels show frames 1, 7, 15, and 30 of a 30-frame sequence in
which there is evidence from the shading on the ellipsoid and shadows cast by the vertical
blocks that the illumination direction is changing as the ball moves from left to right. The
shadow trajectory is similar to the non-linear one described in Figure 4a (Demonstration 2),
General Discussion
41 
except that the shadow trajectory was changed by moving the light source. If the visual system
could accurately take the changing lighting information into account, it would conclude that
the ellipsoid is moving along a linear trajectory in the fronto-parallel plane; observers do not
see this, rather the percept is of an ellipsoid starting near the observer (frame 1), moving back
in depth (frame 15), and then towards the observer again (frame 30).
Figure 13. The position of the ball along the line of sight can be determined if the shadow
location and light source direction are known. However, the shadow location is ambiguous. It
could be a transparent surface ﬂoating above the ﬂoor, or even an opaque surface behind a
transparent ﬂoor. If the shadow patch is identiﬁed as such, it should by necessity be on the
receiving surface. Shadow identiﬁcation may be achieved through a combination of local
cues, as well as the global cue of correlated motion. Another constraint to place the shadow on
the ﬂoor is the coincidence of the orientation of the shadow patch and the ﬂoor.
 
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3

 
Figure 4
Figure 5
 
bc
a
a
b

 
Figure 6

 
Figure 8
∆∆∆∆L
∆∆∆∆D
∆∆∆∆S
 
Figure 7
Perceived Height (mm)
0
10
20
30
40
50
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
[MJT] Size Change
Perceived Height (mm)
1 SE
0
10
20
30
40
50
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Size Change[BPN]
1 SE
0
10
20
30
40
50
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
[JSM]
1 SE
0.1
0.42
0.68
0.9
Shadow Slope
ab
cd
Shadow opacity
0
10
20
30
-1 0 1
Contrast = -1
GDA
40
Ball height (mm)
Shadow slope
 0.0
 0.38
 0.71
 1.0
-1 0 1
Shadow opacity
Ball height (mm)
Contrast = +1
GDA
0
10
20
30
40
a
b
 
Figure 9
WB
Height (mm)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Slope
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
PB
Height (mm)
  Actual light source
--- Implicit light source fit
  Actual light source
--- Implicit light source fit
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
GDA
Height (mm)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Slope
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Slope
  Actual light source
--- Implicit light source fit
 
Figure 10
20
30
40
50
60
10
90°
120°
60°
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Height   (mm)
Slope
60°
90°
120°
 
Figure 11
Figure 12
17
15 30
30
1
15
7
Potential
light source
directions Eye
Potential
shadow locationsPotential ball locations
Floor
 
Figure 13