(~ ~ Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
PRINCIPLES OF TRADITIONAL ANIMATION 
APPLIED TO 3D COMPUTER ANIMATION 
John Lasseter 
Pixar 
San Rafael 
California 
"There is no particular mystery in animation.., it's really very simple, and 
like anything that is simple, it is about the hardest thing in the world to 
do." Bill Tytla at the Walt Disney Studio, June 28, 1937. [14] 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the basic principles of traditional 2D hand drawn 
animation and their application to 3D computer animation. After describing 
how these principles evolved, the individual principles are detailed, 
addressing their meanings in 2D hand drawn animation and their application 
to 3D computer animation. This should demonstrate the importance of 
these principles to quality 3D computer animation. 
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: 
1.3.6 Computer Graphics : Methodology and Techniques - Interaction 
techniques; 
1.3.7 Computer Graphics : Three-dimensional Graphics and Realism - 
Animation; 
J.5 Computer Applications : Arts and Humanities - Arts, fine and 
performing. 
General Terms: Design, Human Factors. 
Additional Keywords and Phrases: Animation Principles, Keyframe 
Animation, Squash and Stretch, Luxo Jr. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Early research in computer animation developed 2D animation techniques 
based on traditional animation. [7] Techniques such as storyboarding [11], 
key/tame animation, [4,5] inbetweening, [16,22] scan/paint, and multiplane 
backgrounds [17] attempted to apply the eel animation process to the 
computer. As 3D computer animation research matured, more resources 
were devoted to image rendering than to animation. Because 3D computer 
animation uses 3D models instead of 2D drawings, fewer techniques from 
traditional animation were applied. Early 3D animation systems were script 
based [6], followed by a few spline-interpolated key/rome systems. [22] But 
these systems were developed by companies for internal use, and so very 
few traditionally trained animators found their way into 3D computer 
animation. 
"Luxo" is a trademark of Jae Jacobsen Industries AS. 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct 
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the 
pubfication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by 
permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy 
otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
© 1987 ACM-0-89791-227-6/87/007/0035 $00.75 
The last two years have seen the appearance of reliable, user friendly, 
keyframe animation systems from such companies as Wavefront 
Technologies Inc., [29] Alias Research Inc., [2] Abel Image Research (RIP), 
[1] Vertigo Systems Inc., [28] Symbolics Inc., [251 and others. These 
systems will enable people to produce more high quality computer 
animation. Unfortunately, these systems will also enable people to produce 
more bad computer animation. 
Much of this bad animation will be due to unfamiliarity with the 
fundamental principles that have been used for hand drawn character 
animation for over 50 years. Understanding these principles of traditional 
animation is essential to producing good computer animation. Such an 
understanding should also be important to the designers of the systems used 
by these animators. 
In this paper, I will explain the fundamental principles of traditional 
animation and how they apply to 3D keyframe computer animation. 
2. PRINCIPLES OF ANIMATION 
Between the late 1920's and the late 1930's animation grew from a novelty 
to an art form at the Walt Disney Studio. With every picture, actions 
became more convincing, and characters were emerging as true personalities. 
Audiences were enthusiastic and many of the animators were satisfied, 
however it was clear to Walt Disney that the level of animation and existing 
characters were not adequate to pursue new story lines-- characters were 
limited to certain types of action and, audience acceptance notwithstanding, 
they were not appealing to the eye. It was apparent to Walt Disney that no 
one could successfully animate a humanized figure or a life-like animal; a 
new drawing approach was necessary to improve the level of animation 
exemplified by the Three Little Pigs. [10] 
FIGURE 1. Luxo Jr.'s hop with overlapping action on cord. Flip pages 
from last page of paper to front. The top figures are frames 1-5, the bottom 
are frames 6-10. 
J ~ 
35 

~ SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
Disney set up drawing classes for his animators at the Chouinard Art 
Institute in Los Angeles under instructor Don Graham. When the classes 
were started, most of the animators were drawing using the old cartoon 
formula of standardized shapes, sizes, actions, and gestures, with little or no 
reference to nature. [12] Out of these classes grew a way of drawing 
moving human figures and animals. The students studied models in 
motion [20] as well as live action film, playing certain actions over and 
over. [131 The analysis of action became important to the development of 
animation. 
Some of the animators began to apply the lessons of these classes to 
production animation, which became more sophisticated and realistic. The 
animators continually searched for better ways to communicate to one 
mother the ideas learned from these lessons. Gradually, procedures were 
isolated and named, analyzed and perfected, and new artists were taught these 
practices as rules of the trade. [26] They became the fundamental principles 
of traditional animation: 
1. Squash and Stretch -- Defining the rigidity and mass of an object by 
distorting its shape during an action. 
2. Timing -- Spacing actions to define the weight and size of objects and 
the personality of characters. 
3. Anticipation -- The preparation for an action. 
4. Staging ,. Presentating an idea so that it is unmistakably clear. 
5. Follow Through and Overlapping Action -- The termination of an 
action and establishing its relationship to the next action. 
6. Straight Ahead Action and Pose-To-Pose Action -- The two contrasting 
approaches to the creation of movement. 
7. Slow In and Out -- The spacing of the inbetween frames to achieve 
subtlety of timing and movement. 
8. Arcs -- The visual path of action for natural movement. 
9. Exaggeration -- Accentuating the essence of an idea via the design and 
the action. 
10. Secondary Action -- The action of an object resulting from another 
action, 
11. Appeal .- Creating a design or an action that the audience enjoys 
watching. 
The application of some of these principles mean the same regardless of the 
medium of animation. 2D hand drawn animation deals with a sequence of 
two dimensional drawings that simulate motion. 3D computer animation 
involves creating a three dimensional model in the computer. Motion is 
achieved by setting keyframe poses and having the computer generate the 
inbetween frames. Timing, anticipation, staging, follow through, overlap, 
exaggeration, and secondary action apply in the same way for both types of 
animation. While the meanings of squash and stretch, slow in and out, arcs, 
appeal, straight ahead action, and pose-to-pose action remain the same, their 
application changes due to the difference in medium. 
2.1 SQUASH AND STRETCH 
The most important principle is called squash and stretch. When an object 
is moved, the movement emphasizes any rigidity in the object. In real life, 
only the most rigid shapes (such as chairs, dishes and pans) remain so 
during motion. Anything composed of living flesh, no matter how bony, 
will show considerable movement in its shape during an action. For 
example, when a bent arm with swelling biceps straightens out, only the 
long sinews are apparent. A face, whether chewing, smiling, talking, or 
just showing a change of expression, is alive with changing shapes in the 
cheeks, the lips, and the eyes. ]26] 
The squashed position depicts the form either flattened out by an external 
pressure or constricted by its own power. The stretched position always 
shows the same form in a very extended condition. [26] 
The most important rule to squash and stretch is that, no matter how 
squashed or stretched out a particular object gets, its volume remains 
constant. If an object squashed down without its sides stretching, it would 
appear to shrink; if it stretched up without its sides squeezing in it would 
appear to grow. Consider the shape and volume of a half filled flour sack: 
when dropped on the floor, it squashed out to its fullest shape. If picked up 
by the top comers, it stretched out to its longest shape. It never changes 
volume. [26] 
The standard animation test for all beginners is drawing a bouncing ball. 
The assignment is to represent the ball by a simple circle, and then have it 
drop, hit the ground, and bounce back into the air. A simple test, but it 
teaches the basic mechanics of animating a scene, introducing timing as 
well as squash and stretch. If the bottom drawing is flattened, it gives the 
appearance of bouncing. Elongating the drawings before and after the 
bounce increases the sense of speed, makes it easier to follow and gives 
more snap to the action. [26,3] (figure 2) 
FIGURE 2. Squash & stretch in bouncing ball. 
Squash and stretch also defines the rigidity of the material making up an 
object. When an object is squashed flat and stretches out drastically, it 
gives the sense that the object is made out of a soft, pliable material and 
vice versa. When the parts of an object are of different materials, they 
should respond differently: flexible parts should squash more and rigid parts 
less. 
An object need not deform in order to squash and stretch. For instance, a 
hinged object like Luxo Jr. (from the film, Lv, xo Jr. I21]), squashes by 
folding over on itself, and stretches by extending out fully. (figure 3) 
FIGURE 3. Squash & stretch in Luxo Jr.'s hop. 
Squash and stretch is very important in facial animation, not only for 
showing the flexibility of the flesh and muscle, but also for showing the 
relationship of between the parts of the face. When a face smiles broadly, 
the comers of the mouth push up into the cheeks. The cheeks squash and 
push up into the eyes, making the eyes squint, which brings down the 
eyebrows and stretches the forehead. When the face adopts a surprised 
expression, the mouth opens, stretching down the cheeks. The wide open 
eyes push the eyebrows up, squashing and wrinkling the forehead. 
36 

~)' Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
Another use of squash and stretch is to help relieve the disturbing effect of 
strobing that happens with very fast motion because sequencial positions of 
an object become spaced far apart. When the action is slow enough, the 
object's positions overlap, and the eye smooths the motion out. (figure 4a) 
However, as the speed of the action increases, so does the distance between 
positions. When the distance becomes far enough that the object does not 
overlap from frame to frame, the eye then begins to perceive separate 
images. (figure 4b) Accurate motion blur is the most realistic solution to 
this problem of strobing, [8,9] but when motion blur is not available, 
squash and stretch is an alternative: the object should be stretched enough so 
that its positions do overlap from frame to frame (or nearly so), and the eye 
will smooth the action out again. (figure 4c) 
FIGURE 4a. In slow action, an object's position 
overlaps from frame to frame which gives the 
action a smooth appearance to the eye. 
FIGURE 4b. Strobing occurs in a faster action 
when the object's positions do not overlap and 
the eye perceives seperate images. 
FIGURE 4c. Stretching the object so that it's positions 
overlap again will relieve the strobing effect. 
In 3D keyframe computer animation, the scale transformation can be used 
for squash and stretch. When scaling up in Z, the object should be scaled 
down in X and Y to keep the volume the same. Since the direction of the 
stretch should be along the path of action, a rotational transformation may 
be required to align the object along an appropriate axis. 
2.2 TIMING 
Timing, or the speed of an action, is an important principle because it 
gives meaning to movement-- the speed of an action defines how well the 
idea behind the action will read to an audience. It reflects the weight and 
size of an object, and can even carry emotional meaning. 
Proper timing is critical to making ideas readable. It is important to spend 
enough time (but no more) preparing the audience for: the anticipation of an 
action; the action itself; and the reaction to the action. If too much time is 
spent on any of these, the audience's attention will wander. If too little 
time is spent, the movement may be finished before the audience notices it, 
thus wasting the idea. [30] 
The faster the movement, the more important it is to make sure the 
audience can follow what is happening. The action must not be so fast that 
the audience cannot read it and understand the meaning of it. [30] 
More than any other principle, timing defines the weight of an object. Two 
objects, identical in size and shape, can appear to be two vastly different 
weights by manipulating timing alone. The heavier an object is, the greater 
its mass, and the more force is required to change its motion. A heavy body 
is slower to accelerate and decelerate than a light one. It takes a large force 
to get a cannonball moving, but once moving, it tends to keep moving at 
the same speed and requires some force to stop it. When dealing with heavy 
objects, one must allow plenty of time and force to start, stop or change 
their movements, in order to make their weight look convincing. [30] 
Light objects have much less resistance to change of movement and so need 
much less time to start moving. The flick of a finger is enough to make a 
balloon accelerate quickly away. When moving, it has little momentum 
and even the friction of the air quickly slows it up. [30] 
Timing can also contribute greatly to the feeling of size or scale of an 
object or character. A giant has much more weight, more mass, more 
inertia than a normal man; therefore he moves more slowly. Like the 
cannonball, he takes more time to get started and, once moving, takes more 
time to stop. Any changes of movement take place more slowly. 
Conversely, a tiny character has less inertia than normal, so his movements 
tend to be quicker. [30] 
The way an object behaves on the screen, the effect of weight that it gives, 
depend entirely on the spacing of the poses and not on the poses 
themselves. No matter how well rendered a cannonball may be, it does not 
look like a cannonball if it does not behave like one when animated. The 
same applies to any object or character. [30] 
The emotional state of a character can also be defined more by its movement 
than by its appearence, and the varying speed of those movements indicates 
whether the character is lethargic, excited, nervous or relaxed. Thomas and 
Johnston [26] describe how changing the timing of an action gives it new 
meaning: 
Just two drawings of a head, the first showing it leaning toward the right 
shoulder and the second with it over on the left and its chin slightly raised, 
can be made to communicate a multitute of ideas, depending entirely on the 
Timing used. Each inbetween drawing added between these two "extremes" 
gives a new meaning to the action. 
NO inbetweens ........... The Character has been hit by a tremendous force. 
His head is nearly snapped off. 
ONE inbetweens ......... The Character has been hit by a brick, rolling pin, 
frying pan. 
TWO inbetweens ......... The Character has a nervous tic, a muscle spasm, 
an uncontrollable twitch. 
THREE inbetweens ..... The Character is dodging a brick, rolling pin, 
frying pan. 
FOUR inbetweens ........... The Character is giving a crisp order, "Get 
going!" "Move it!" 
FIVE inbetweens ........... The Character is more friendly, "Over here." 
"Come on-hurry!" 
SIX inbetweens ........... The Character sees a good looking girl, or the 
sports car he has always wanted. 
SEVEN inbetweens ........... The Character tries to get a better look at 
something. 
5< f J 
37 

"~ SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
EIGHT inbetweens ........... The Charaeter searches for the peanut butter on 
the kitchen shelf. 
NINE inbetweens ........... The Character appraises, considering thoughtfully. 
TEN inbetweens ........... The Character stretches a sore muscle. 
FIGURE 5. Wally B.'s zip off shows use of squash and stretch, 
anticipation, follow through, overlapping action, and secondary action. 
2.3 ANTICIPATION 
An action occurs in three parts: the preparation for the action, the action 
proper, and the termination of the action. Anticipation is the preparation 
for the action; the latter two are discussed in the next sections. 
There are several facets to Anticipation. In one sense, it is the anatomical 
provision for an action. Since muscles in the body function through 
contraction, each must be first be extended before it can contract. A foot 
must be pulled back before it can be swung forward to kick a ball. [12] 
Without anticipation many actions are abrupt, stiff and unnatural. 
Anticipation is also a device to catch the audience's eye, to prepare them for 
the next movement and lead them to expect it before it actually occurs. 
Anticipation is often used to explain what the following action is going to 
be. Before a character reaches to grab an object, he first raises his arms as 
he stares at the article, broadcasting the fact that he is going to do 
something with that particular object. The anticipatory moves may not 
show why he is doing something, but there is no question about what he 
is going to do next. [26] 
Anticipation is also used to direct the attention of the audience to the fight 
part of the screen at the fight moment. This is essential for preventing the 
audience from missing some vital action. In the very beginning of Luxo Jr., 
Dad is on screen alone looking offstage. He then reacts, anticipating 
something happening there. When Jr. does hop in, the audience is prepared 
for the action. 
The amount of anticipation used considerably affects the speed of the action 
which follows it. If the audience expects something to happen, then it can 
be much faster without losing them. If they are not properly prepared for a 
very fast action, they may miss it completely; the anticipation must be 
made larger or the action slower. [30] In a slow action the anticipation is 
often minimized and the meaning carried in the action proper. [121 In one 
shot inThe Adventures of Andre and Wally B. , Wally B. zips off to the 
right. The actual action of the zip off is only 3 or 4 frames long, but he 
anticipates the zip long enough for the audience to know exactly what is 
coming next. (figure 5) 
Anticipation can also emphasize heavy weight, as for a character picking up 
an object that is very heavy. An exaggerated anticipation, like bending way 
down before picking up the object, helps the momentum of the character to 
lift the heavy weight. Likewise for a fat character standing up from a seated 
position: he will bend his upper body forward, with his hands on the 
armrests of the chair, before pushing up with his arms and using the 
momentum of his body. [31] 
2.4 STAGING 
Staging is the presentation of an idea so it is completely and unmistakably 
clear; this principle translates directly from 2-D hand drawn animation. An 
action is staged so that it is understood; a personality is staged so that it is 
recognizable; an expression so that it can be seen; a mood so that it will 
affect the audience. [26] 
To stage an idea clearly, the audience's eye must be led to exactly where it 
needs to be at the right moment, so that they will not miss the idea, 
Staging, anticipation and timing are all integral to directing the eye. A 
well-timed anticipation will be wasted if it is not staged clearly. 
It is important, when staging an action, that only one idea be seen by the 
audience at a time. If a lot of action is happening at once, the eye does not 
know where to look and the main idea of the aclion will be "upstaged" and 
overlooked. The object of interest should contrast from the rest of the 
scene. In a still scene, the eye will be attracted to movement. In a very 
busy scene, the eye will be attracted to something that is still. Each idea or 
action must be staged in the strongest and the simplest way before going on 
to the next idea or action. The animator is saying, in effect, "Look at this, 
now look at this, and now look at this." [26] 
38 

(~ ~ Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
In Luxo Jr. , it was very important that the audience was looking in the 
right place at the right time, because the story, acting and emotion was 
being put across with movement alone, in pantomime, and sometimes the 
movement was very subtle. If the audience missed an action, an emotion 
would be missed, and the story would suffer. So the action had to be paced 
so that only Dad or Jr. was doing an important action at any one time, 
never both. In the beginning of the film, Dad is on screen alone your eye 
was on him. But as soon as Jr. hops on-screen, he is moving faster than 
Dad, therefore the audience's eyes immediately goes to him and stays there. 
Most of the time Jr. was on-screen, Dad's actions were very subtle, so the 
attention of the audience was always on Jr. where most of the story was 
being told. If Dad's actions were important, Jr.'s actions were toned down 
and Dad's movements were emphasized and the attention of the audience 
would transfer to Dad. For example, when Jr. looks up to Dad after he's 
pol3q3eA the bali and Dad shakes his head, all eyes are on him. 
Another idea developed in the early days at Disney was the importance of 
staging an action in silhouette. In those days, all the characters were black 
and white, with no gray values to soften the contrast or delineate a form. 
Bodies, arms and hands were all black, so there was no way to stage an 
action clearly except in silhouette. A hand in front of a chest would simply 
disappear. Out of this limitation, the animators realized that it is always 
better to show an action in silhouette. Charlie Chaplin maintained that if 
an actor knew his emotion thoroughly, he could show it silhouette. [26] 
In The Adventures of Andre and Wally B., Andre awakes and sits up, then 
scratches his side. If he were to scratch his stomach instead of his side, the 
action would happen in front of his body and would be unclear what was 
happening. (figure 6) 
FIGURE 6. Andre's scratch was staged to the side (in "silhouette") for 
clarity and became that is where his itch was. 
In Luxo Jr., all the action was animated with silhouette in mind. When 
Dad and Jr. come face to face for the first time, it is easy to see what is 
happening because it is staged to the side. If Jr. was in front of Dad 
looking up at him, it would be difficult to read. (figure 7) Jr. hopping on 
the ball would be confusing if the action was to happen with Jr. facing the 
camera. Viewed from the side it is perfectly clear, (figure 8) 
2.5 FOLLOW THROUGH AND OVERLAPPING ACTION 
Just as the anticipation is the preparation of an action,follow through is 
the termination of an action. Actions very rarely come to a sudden and 
complete stop, but are generally carried past their termination point. For 
example, a hand, after releasing a thrown ball, continues past the actual 
point of release. 
In the movement of any object or figure, the actions of the parts are not 
simultaneous: some part must initiate the move, like the engine of a main. 
This is called the lead. In walking, the action starts with the hips. As the 
hip swings forward, it sets a leg in motion. The hip "leads", the leg 
FIGURES 7-8. In Luxo Jr., all action was staged to the side for clarity. 
"follows." As the hip twists, the torso follows, then the shoulder, the arm, 
the wrist, and finally the fingers. Although most large body actions start in 
the hips, the wrist will lead the fingers in a hand gestoxe, and the eyes will 
usually lead the head in an action. [12] 
Appendages or loose parts of a character or object will move at a slower 
speed and "drag" behind the leading part of the figure. Then as the leading 
part of the figure slows to a stop, these appeftdages will continue to move 
and will take longer to settle down. As with squash and streteh, the objects 
mass is shown in the way the object slows down. The degree that the 
appendages drag behind and the time it takes for them to stop is directly 
proportional to their weight. The heavier they are the farther behind they 
drag and the longer they take to settle to a stop. Conversely, if they are 
lighter, they will drag less and stop more quickly. 
J' 
39 

'~ SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 i i n,i i 
In The Adventures of Andre and Watly B., this principle was used 
extensively on Wally B.'s feet, antennae and stinger. They all dragged 
behind his head and body, and continued to move well after the body had 
stopped. To convey that these loose appendages were made of different 
materials and different masses, the rate of the follow through was different 
for each type. His antennae were fairly light, so they dragged behind just 
slightly. His stinger was like stainless steel, so it dragged behind the action 
more than the antennae. And his feet were heavy and very flexible, as 
though they were water balloons; therefore, they always followed far behind 
the main action with a lot of squash and stretch. In the zip off illustrated 
above (figure 5), the action of Wally B.'s body was so fast and the feet 
weighed so much that they dragged far behind. They were even left on 
screen frames after the body had disappeared. 
Often, slight variations are added to the timing and speed of the loose parts 
of objects. This overlapping action makes the object seem natural, the 
action more interesting. In Wally's zip off (figure 5), his feet zipped off, 
one after the other, about one or two frames apart. The action was so fast 
that it was difficult to see each foot going off separately, but It made the 
action as a whole more interesting. 
Perhaps more important, overlapping is critical to conveying main ideas of 
the story. An action should never be brought to a complete stop before 
starting another action, and the second action should overlap the first. 
Overlapping maintains a continual flow and continuity between whole 
phrases of actions. 
Walt Disney once explained overlapping this way, "It is not necessary for 
an animator to take a character to one point, complete that action 
completely, and then turn to the following action as if he had never given it 
a thought until after completing the first action. When a character knows 
what his is going to do he doesn't have to stop before each individual action 
and think to do it. He has #planned in advance in his mind. For example, 
the mind thinks, "I'll close the door - lock it - then I'm going to undress and 
go to bed." Well, you walk over to the door - before the walk is finished 
you're reaching for the door - before the door is closed you reach for the key 
- before the door is lockedyou're turning away - while you're walking away 
you undo your tie - and before you reach the bureau you have your tie off. 
In other words, before you know it you're undressed - and you've done it in 
one thought, "I'm going to bed.' " [12] 
2.6 STRAIGHT AHEAD ACTION AND POSE-TO-POSE ACTION 
(KEYFRAMES) 
There are two main approaches to hand drawn animation. The first is 
known as straight ahead action because the animator literally works straight 
ahead from his first drawing in the scene. He knows where the scene fits in 
the story and the business it has to include. He does one drawing after 
another, getting new ideas as he goes along, until he reaches the end of the 
scene. Thig process usually produces drawings and action that have a fresh 
and slightly zany look, because the whole process was kept very creative. 
Straight ahead action is used for wild, scrambling actions where spontaneity 
is important. 
The second approach is called pose-to-pose. Here the animator plans his 
actions, figures out just what drawings will be needed to animate the 
business, makes the drawings concentrating on the poses, relates them to 
each other in size and action, and then draws the inbetweens. Pose-to-pose 
is used for animation that requires good acting, where the poses and timing 
are all important. 
The pose-to-pose technique applies to keyframe computer animation with 
timing and pose control of extremes and inbetweens. The difficulty in 
controlling the inbetweens makes it incorrect to approach keyframe 
computer animation exactly as one would pose-to-pose hand drawn 
animation. In working with a complex model, creating a complete pose at 
a time would make the inbetweens too unpredictable. The path of action 
will in general be incorrect and objects will intersect one another. The result 
is much time-consuming reworking of inbetweens. 
There is a much better approach in the context of a hierarchical modelling 
system, which works "layer by layer" down the hierarchy. Instead of 
animating one complete pose to another, one transformation is animated at 
a time, starting with the trunk of the hierarchical tree structure, working 
transformation by transformation down the branches to the end. Fewer 
extremes are used. Not all translates, rotates and scales have extremes on the 
same frames; some have many extremes and others very few. With fewer 
extremes, the importance of the inbetweens increases, Tension and direction 
controls on the interpolating splines are helpful in controlling the spacing 
of the inbetween and to achieve slow in and out. [16] (See Slow In and Out) 
This layer approach to animation shares many important elements with the 
pose-to-pose technique in hand drawn animation. Planning the animation 
out in advance, as in pose-to-pose, becomes even more important. The 
action must be well thought out, the timing and poses planned so that even 
in the early layers, the poses and actions are clear. 
The Aventures of Andre and Wally B. and Luxo Jr. were both animated 
using a keyframe animation system called Md (Motion Doctor). [19] Luxo 
Jr. was animated using this layered approach to the keyfranles. Jr.'s hop 
(figure 1) was animated by first setting the keyframes for his forward 
movement only: two keyframes were set for the X translation, the first 
where the hop starts and the second where he lands. This defined the timing 
of his hop. The height of his hop was then defined by setting a keyframe in 
the Z translation (Z being up in this case). The next step, animating the 
rotation of Jr.'s arms, was important because the arms define the 
anticipation, squash and stretch, and follow through of the action. 
Keyframes were set for just about every frame, rotating the arms together 
before the hop for the anticipation, then immediately far apart for the stretch 
of the jump. The arms were rotated together again at the top of the arc 
where the action slows slightly, then rotated far apart, stretching to 
anticipate the landing. To indicate the shock of the landing, the arms were 
rotated quickly together two frames after the base lands on the floor. This is 
the follow through of the action. His base and shade were animated in the 
next two steps. Like the arms, many keyframes were set to define the 
rotation of the base and shade because their movement was important for 
anticipation and follow through. 
2.7 SLOW IN AND OUT 
Slow in and slow out deals with the spacing of the inbetween drawings 
between the extreme poses. Mathematically, the term refers to second- and 
third-order continuity of motion. 
In early animation, the action was limited to mainly fast and slow moves, 
the spacing from one drawing to the next fairly even. But when the poses 
of pose-to-pose animation became more expressive, animators wanted the 
audience to see them. They found that by grouping the inbetweens closer to 
each extreme, with only one fleeting drawing halfway between, they could 
achieve a very spirited result, with the character zipping from one attitude to 
another. "Slowing out" of one pose, then "slowing in" to the next pose 
simply refers to the timing of the inbetweens. 
The animator indicates the placement of the inbetweens, the slow in or slow 
out, with a "timing chart" drawn on the side of the drawing. This tells 
himself, or his assistant who will be doing the inbetweens later, how he 
wanted the timing to be and where he wanted the inbetween drawings placed. 
(figur~ 9) 
EXTREME 
• EXTREME 
FIGURE 9. Timing chart for ball bounce. 
40 

(~ ~ Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
In most 3D keyframe computer animation systems, the inbetweening is 
done automatically using spline interpolation. Slow in and slow out is 
achieved by adjusting the tension, direction or bias, and continuity of the 
splines. [16] This works well to give the affect of slow in and out, but a 
graphical representation of the spline is required to see the effect of tension, 
direction, and continuity have on its shape. 
With this type of spline interpolation, a common problem is the spline 
overshooting at extremes when there is a large change in value between 
them, especially over a small number of frames. This also happens when 
the direction control of an extreme is adjusted. The danger is that, 
depending on the variable the spline controls (translate, rotate, or scale), the 
value will shoot in the wrong direction just before (or just after) the large 
change in value. Sometimes this effect works out well when it occurs just 
before a large movement, it may appear to be an anticipation. However, 
more often than not, it gives an undesirable effect. 
In Luxo Jr., there was an example of this problem of overshooting splines. 
Jr.'s base was very heavy and when he hopped, we wanted the base to start 
stationary, then pop up in the air from the momentum of his jump, arc 
over, then land with a thud, suddenly stationary again. For the up 
translation, there were three keyframes, the two stationary positions and the 
highest point of his jump. The spline software forced continuity, so that his 
base would move down under the surface of the floor just before and after 
the jump. (figure 10a) The solution was to put two new extremes, equal to 
the two stationary extremes, on the frames just before and just after the 
extremes. This "locked" down the spline, so that the up translation stayed 
the same value, popped up in the air, landed and then stayed the same value 
again. This gave the desired feeling of weight to his little base, (figure 10b) 
The same solution can be achieved by breaking the spline using its 
continuity parameter [16] at the two stationary extremes. This solution 
requires a graphical display of the spline so that the correct shape can be 
achieved. 
FIGURE 10a. This spline controls the Z (up) translation of Luxo Jr. 
Dips in the spline cause him to intersect the floor. 
FIGURE 10b. Two extra extremes are added to the spline 
which removes the dips and prevents Jr. from going into the basement. 
2.8 ARCS 
The visual path of action from one extreme to another is always described 
by an arc. Arcs in nature are the most economical routes by which a form 
can move from one position to another. In animation, such arcs are used 
extensively, for they make animation much smoother and less stiff than a 
straight line for the path of action. In certain cases, an arc may resolve 
itself into a straight path, as for a falling object, but usually,, even in a 
straight line action, the object rotates. [12] 
In most 3D keyframe computer animation systems, the path of action from 
one extreme to another is controlled by the same spline that controls the 
timing (slow in and out) of the inbetween values. This may simplify 
computating the inbetweens but it has unfortunate effects. When a motion 
is slow, with many inbetweens, the arc of the path of action is curved, as 
desired. But when the action is fast, the arc flattens out: the faster the 
action, the flatter the arc. Sometimes this is desirable, but more often, the 
path of even a fast motion should be curved or arced. Straight inbetweens 
can completely kill the essence of an action. 
The spline that defines the path of action should be separate from the spline 
that defines the timing or spacing of the inbetweens for several reasons: so 
that the arc of a fast acdon doesn't flatten out; so that you can adjust the 
timing of the inbetweens without effecting the path of action; so that you 
can use different splines to define the path of action (where a B-spline is 
appropriate for its smoothness) and the timing (a CatmuU - Rom spline so 
you can adjust it's tension and direction controls to get slow in and out). 
This technique is not common, but research is being done in this area. [15] 
2.9 EXAGGERATION 
The meaning of exaggeration is, in general, obvious. However, the 
principle of exaggeration in animation does not mean arbitrarily distorting 
shapes or objects or making an action more violent or unrealistic. The 
animator must go to the heart of anything or any idea and develop its 
essence, understanding the reason for it, so that the audience will also 
understand it. If a eharacter is sad, make him sadder; if he is bright, make 
him shine; worried, make him fret; wild, make him frantic. 
A scene has many components to it: the design, the shape of the objects, 
the action, the emotion, the color, the sound. Exaggeration can work with 
any component, but not in isolation. The exaggeration of the various 
components should be balanced. If just one thing is exaggerated in an 
otherwise lifelike scene, it will stick out and seem unrealistic. 
f 
41 

~ SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
FIGURE 11. Varying the scale of different parts of Dad created the 
child-like proportions of Luxo Jr. 
V * 
FIGURE 12. Andre's yawn was made more interesting by not duplicating 
the poses and the action from one side of his body to the other. 
However, exaggerating everything in a scene can be equally unrealistic to an 
audience. Some elements must be based in nature, with others exaggerated 
unnaturally. If there is an element that the audience can recognize, 
something that seems natural to them, that becomes the ground for 
comparison of the exaggeration of the other elements, and the whole scene 
remains very realistic to them. 
In Luxo Jr., all the components of the scene, some naturalistic, some 
exaggerated, worked together to make it believable and realistic. The design 
of the lamps was based on the real Luxo lamp, but certain parts were 
exaggerated./r.'s proportions were exaggerated to give the feeling of a child 
(See Appeal). 
The movement had the sense of natural physics, yet almost every motion 
and action was exaggerated to accentuate it: when Jr. he hit the ball, he 
really whacked it, When he jumped up for a hop, his whole body movement 
was exaggerated to give the feeling of realistic weight to his base. When he 
landed after a hop, the impact was shown in the exaggeration of his body 
movements. On the soundtrack, the lamp sounds were recorded from a real 
Luxo lamp, then exaggerated sounds were added to accent certain actions. 
[23] The ironic effect of all this exaggeration was to make the film more 
realistic, while making it entertaining, 
2.10 SECONDARY ACTION 
A secondary action is an action that results directly from another action. 
Secondary actions are important in heightening interest and adding a realistic 
complexity to the animation. A secondary actions is always kept 
subordinate to the primary action. If it conflicts, becomes more interesting, 
or dominates in any way, it is either the wrong choice or is staged 
improperly. [26] 
Wally B.'s feet dragging behind the main action of his body is a secondary 
action because the movement of the feet is a direct result of the movement 
of the body. (fi~ure 5) The rippling movement of Luxo Jr.'s cord results 
directly from the hopping action of his base. (figure 1) 
The facial expression of a character will sometimes be a secondary action. 
When the main idea of an action is being told in the movement of the body, 
the facial expression become subordinate to the main idea. If this 
expression is going to animate or change, the danger is not that the 
expression will dominate the scene, but that it will never be seen. The 
change must come before, or after, the move. A change in the middle of a 
major move will go unnoticed, and value intended will be lost. It must 
also be staged to be obvious, though secondary. [26] 
2.11 APPEAL 
The word appeal is often misrepresented to suggest cuddly bunnies and soft 
kittens. It doesn't; it means anything that a person likes to see: a quality of 
charm, pleasing design, simplicity, communication, or magnetism. Your 
eye is drawn to the figure or object that has appeal, and, once there, it is 
held while you appreciate the object. A weak drawing or design lacks 
appeal. A design that is complicated or hard to read lacks appeal. Clumsy 
shapes and awkward moves all have low appeal. Where the live action actor 
has charisma, the animated character has appeal. [26] 
The appeal in Laxo Jr. was achieved in different ways. In designing the 
characters, the feeling of a baby lamp and a grown up lamp was very 
important. The effect was achieved using exaggeration in proportion, in the 
same way a puppy is proportioned very differently than an adult dog, or a 
human baby is different from an adult. The light bulb is the same size on 
Jr., while the shade is smaller. The springs and support rods are the same 
diameter as Dad's, yet they are much shorter. (figure 11) 
In creating an appealing pose for a character, one thing to avoid is called 
"twins", where both arms and both legs are in the same position, doing the 
same thing. This gives the pose a stiff, wooden, unappealling quality. If 
each part of the body varies in some way from its corresponding part, the 
character will look more natural and more appealing. Likewise one side of a 
face should never mirror the other. 
In The Aventures of Andre and Wally B. , Andre wakes up and yawns. The 
yawn is more appealing because the poses and actions are not duplicated 
from one side of his body to the other. His feet rotate with a slight 
difference, the head rotates to one side, the upper part of his body rotates to 
the right and tilts, which raises his right arm higher than his left. When he 
stretches his arms, the right arm moves out first, followed by the left, and 
the actions overlap. (figure 12) 
42 

@ Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
3. PERSONAHTY 
This final section discusses the underlying goal of all the principles 
discussed earlier. Personality in character animation is not a principle unto 
itself, but the intelligent application of all of the principles of animation. 
When character animation is successful and the audience is thoroughly 
entertained, it is because the characters and the story have become more 
important and apparent than the technique that went into the animation. 
Whether drawn by hand or computer, the success of character animation lies 
in the personality of the characters 
In character animation, all actions and movements of a character are the 
result of its thought processes. "The thinking animation character becomes 
a character." [12] Without a thought process, the actions of a character are 
just a series of unrelated motions. With a thought process to connect them, 
the actions bring a character to life. 
In order to get a thought process into an animation, it is critical to have the 
personality of a character clearly in mind at the outset, so that it makes 
sense to ask at any moment, "What mood is the character in. How would 
he do this action?" 
One character would not do a particular action the same way in two different 
emotional states. An example of this, in Luxo Jr., is the action of Jr. 
hopping. When he is chasing the ball, he is very excited, happy, all his 
thoughts on the ball. His hops are fast, his head up looking at the ball, 
with very little time on the ground between hops because he can't wait to 
get to the ball. After he pops the ball, however, his hop changes drastically, 
reflecting his sadness that the object of all of his thoughts and energy just a 
moment ago is now dead. As he hops off, each hop is slower, with much 
more time on the ground between hops, his head down. Before, he had a 
direction and purpose to his hop. Now he is just hopping off to nowhere. 
No two characters would do the same action in the same way. For example, 
in Luxo Jr., beth Dad and Jr. bat the ball with their heads. Yet Dad, who is 
larger and older, leans over the ball and uses only his shade to bat it. Jr., 
however, who is smaller, younger, and full of excited energy, whacks the 
ball with his shade, putting his whole body into iL 
When defining the character, it is important to make the personality 
distinct, and at the same time have characteristics that are familiar to the 
audience. If the actions of a character ring true, the audience will be able to 
relate to the character, and he will be believable to them. 
4. CONCLUSION 
Whether it is generated by hand or by computer, the first goal of the 
animator is to entertain. The animator must have two things: a clear 
concept of exactly what will entertain the audience; and the tools and skills 
to put those ideas across clearly and unambiguously. Tools, in the sense of 
hardware and software, are simply not enough. The principles discussed in 
this paper, so useful in producing 50 years of rich entertainment, are tools 
as well.., tools which are just as important as the computers we work with. 
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author would like to express sincere thanks to Bill Reeves and Eben 
Ostby for their unending support, education and creativity with the technical 
aspects of computer animation. Steve Upstill for making it sound like I 
know English. Nancy Tague for her ruthless editing even-on my birthday. 
Kate Smith and Michael Shantzis for their assistance in editing this paper 
even when they could have been watching Willie Wonka on video tape. 
Craig Good for helping with the video tape portion of this paper. Joey 
Tague for being pals and for telling us what happened in Willie Wonka. 
And especially to Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston for their instruction in 
animation when the author was at the Disney Studio, and for their continued 
inspiration with their book. [26] 
6. REFERENCES 
1. Abel Image Research, 953 N. Highland Ave., Los Angeles, CA 
90038-2481 
2. Alias Research Inc., 110 Richmond St. East, Suite 500, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada m5c- lpl 
3. Blair, Preston, Animation, Walter T. Foster, Santa Ana CA, 1949. 
4. Burmyk, Nester and Wein, Marceli, "Computer Generated Keyframe 
Animation," Journal of the SMVrE 80, pp.149-153, March 1971. 
5. Burtnyk, Nester and Wein, Marceli, "Interactive Skeleton Techniques 
for Enhanced Motion Dynamics in Key Frame Animation," 
Communications of the ACM 19 (10), pp 564-569, October, 1976. 
6. Catmull, Edwin, "A System for Computer Generated Movies," 
Proceedings ACM Annual Conference, pp. 422-431, August 1972. 
7. Catmull, Edwin, "The problems of Computer- Assisted Animation," 
SIGGRAPH '78, Computer Graphics, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 348-353, 
August 1978. 
8. Cook, Robert L., "Stochastic Sampling in Computer Graphics," ACM 
Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 51-72, January 1986. 
9. Cook, Robert L., Porter, Thomas, and Carpenter, Loren, "Distributed 
Ray Tracing," SIGGRAPH '84, Computer Graphics, Vol. 18, No. 3, 
pp.137-145, July, 1984. 
10. Walt Disney Productions, Three Little Pigs, (film), 1933. 
11. Gracer, F., and Blagen, M. W., "Karma" A System for Storyboard 
Animation," Procee.ding Ninth Annual UAIDE Meeting, pp. 210-255, 
1970. 
12. Graham, Don, The Art of Animation, unpublished. 
13. Graham, Don, transcripts of action analysis class at the Walt Disney 
Studio, June 21, 1937. 
14. Graham, Don, transcripts of action analysis class with Bill Tytla at 
the Walt Disney Studio, June 28, 1937. 
15. Hardtke, lnes, and Bartels, Richard, "Kinetics for Key-Frame 
Interpolation," unpublished. 
16. Kochanek, Doris, and Barrels, Richard, "Interpolating Splines with 
Local Tension, Continuity, and Bias Control," SIGGRAPH '84, 
Computer Graphics, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 33-41, July, 1984. 
17. I.~voy, Marc, "A Color Animation System Based on the Multi-Plane 
Technique," SIGGRAPH '77, Computer Graphics, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 
64-71, July, 1977. 
43 

. ~ SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
18. Lucasfilm Ltd. Computer Graphics Div., The Adventures of Andre 
and Wally B., (fdm), 1984. 
19. Ostby, Eben, Duff, Tom, and Reeves, William, Md (motion doctor), 
animation program, Lucasfilm Ltd., 1982-1986. 
20. Perine, Robert, Chouinard, An Art Vision Betrayed , Artra 
Publishing, Encinitas CA, 1985. 
21. Pixar, Luxo Jr., (film), 1986. 
22. Reeves, William, "Inbetweening for Computer Animation Utilizing 
Moving Point Constraints," SIGGRAPH '81, Computer Graphics, Vol. 
15, NO. 3, pp. 263-270, August 1981. 
23. Rydstrom, Gary, Soundtraek for Luxo Jr., Sprocket Systems Div., 
Lucasfilm Ltd., July, 1986. 
24. Stem, Garland, "Bboop--A System for 3D Keyframe Figure 
Animation," Tutorial Notes: Introduction to Computer Animation , 
SIGGRAPH '83, July 1983. 
25. Symbolics Inc., 1401 Westwood Blvd., Los Angeles, CA 90024 
26. Thomas, Frank and Johnston, Ollie, Disney Animation-- The Illusion 
of Life, Abbeville Press, New York, 1981. 
27. Thomas, Frank, "Can Classic Disney Animation Be Duplicated On 
The Computer?" Computer Pictures, Vol. 2, Issue 4, pp. 20-26, 
luly/August 1984. 
28. Vertigo Systems International Inc., 119 W. Pender St., Suite 221, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada v6b ls5 
29. Wavefront Technologies, 530 East Montecito, Santa Barbara, CA 
93101 
30. Whitakcr, Harold and Halas, John, Timing for Animation , Focal 
Press, London, 1981. 
31. White, Tony, The Animator's Workbook, Watson-Gupfill, New 
York, 1996. 
44 
