ever before.® 1 - 


Focal 
Press 


Timing for Animation 


Related Focal Press Visual Effects and Animation Titles: 


The Animator’s Guide to 2D Computer Animation 
Hedley Griffin 


Producing Animation 
Catherine Winder and Zahra Dowlatabadi 


Digital Compositing for Film and Video 
Steve Wright 


A Guide to Computer Animation: for TV, Games, Multimedia and Web 
Marcia Kuperberg 


Essential CG Lighting 
Darren Brooker 


Film Animation 
Dan McLaughlin 


Character Animation in 3D 
Steve Roberts 


Personal Animation: Create & Distribute Your Film 
Steve Subotnick 


For more information on Focal Press titles visit www.focalpress.com 


Timing for Animation 


Harold Whitaker and John Halas 
Updated by Tom Sito 


AMSTERDAM °* BOSTON ¢ HEIDELBERG * LONDON *¢ NEW YORK * OXFORD 
PARIS ¢ SAN DIEGO ¢ SAN FRANCISCO * SINGAPORE ¢ SYDNEY * TOKYO Ath 
ress 


Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier 


Focal Press is an imprint of Elsevier 
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK 
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA 


First published 1981 
Reprinted 1990, 1997, 1999 (twice), 2000, 2001, 2002 
Second edition 2009 


Copyright © 2009 Harold Whitaker, John Halas & Tom Sito. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved. 


The rights of Harold Whitaker, John Halas & Tom Sito to be identified as the authors of this work have been 
asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 


No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or 
by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior written 
permission of the publisher 


Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Science & Technology Rights Department in Oxford, UK: 
phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333; email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively visit 
the Science & Technology Books website at www.elsevierdirect.com/rights for further information 


Notice 

No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a 
matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, 
instructions or ideas contained in the material herein 


British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Sito, Tom, 1956- 
Timing for animation. -2nd ed. 
1. Animation (Cinematography) 
|. Title Il. Whitaker, Harold, 1920- 
778.5'347-dc22 


Library of Congress Control Number: 2009926204 
ISBN: 978-0-240-52160-2 
For information on all Focal Press publications 
visit our website at www.focalpress.com 
Printed and bound in China 


0910111213 10987654321 


Working together to grow 
libraries in developing countries 


www.elsevier.com | www.bookaid.org | www.sabre.org 


ELSEVIER BOOKAID Sabre Foundation 


Contents 


Foreword by John Lasseter, Pixar 


Preface to 2nd edition 
Preface to 1st edition 
Acknowledgements 


Introduction: General Principles of Timing 
Timing for TV Series 
Timing for Full Animation 
Timing in General 
What is Good Timing? 
The Storyboard 
Traditional Storyboards 
Digital Storyboards 
Additional Storyboard Effects 
Responsibility of the Director 
The Basic Unit of Time in Animation 
Timing for Television vs. Timing for Feature Films 
Slugging 
Bar Sheets 


Timing for Traditional Animation: Exposure Charts or Exposure 
Sheets 


Timing for an Overseas Production 
Timing for a 2D Digital Production 
Timing for a 3D Digital Production 
Timing for an Actor-Based Program (Performance or Motion Capture) 


Animation and Properties of Matter 


Movement and Caricature 
Cause and Effect 

Newton’s Laws of Motion 
Objects Thrown Through the Air 
Timing of Inanimate Objects 


mn uN NY =| = = 


27 
28 
31 
33 
35 


Contents 


Rotating Objects 37 
Irregular Inanimate Objects 37 
Animate Objects—Characters 37 

Force Transmitted Through a Flexible Joint 39 

Force Transmitted Through Jointed Limbs 41 

Spacing of Drawings—General Remarks 42 

Spacing of Drawings 45 

Timing a Slow Action 47 

Timing a Fast Action 48 

Getting Into and Out of Holds 51 

Single Frames or Double Frames? Ones or Twos? 52 

How Long to Hold? 54 

Anticipation 56 

Follow Through 59 

Overlapping Action 61 

Ld 

Timing an Oscillating Movement 62 

Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—1 64 

Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—2 66 

Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—3 68 

Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—4 71 

Timing to Suggest Force: Repeat Action 73 

Character Reactions and ‘Takes’ 75 

Timing to Give a Feeling of Size 76 

The Effects of Friction, Air Resistance and Wind 79 

Timing Cycles—How Long a Repeat? 80 
A Waving Flag 81 

Multiple Character Scenes 82 

Digital Crowd Scenes 82 

Effects Animation: Flames and Smoke 84 

Water 86 

Rain 90 
Water Drops 91 

Snow 91 

Explosions 93 

Digital Effects 94 
The Aesthetic in Effects Animation 94 


vi 


Contents 


Repeat Movements of Inanimate Objects 97 
Timing a Walk 98 
Types of Walk 101 
Spacing of Drawings in Perspective Animation 102 
Timing Animals’ Movements 105 
Horses 105 
Other Quadrupeds 107 
Timing an Animal's Gallop 108 
Bird Flight 110 
Drybrush (Speed Lines) and Motion Blur 112 
Accentuating a Movement 115 
Strobing 117 
Fast Run Cycles 118 
Characterization (Acting) 120 
The Use of Timing to Suggest Mood 123 
Synchronizing Animation to Speech 125 
——— ee 
Lip-Sync—1 126 
Lip-Sync—2 129 
Lip-Sync—3 130 
Timing and Music 133 
Traditional Camera Movements 135 
3D Camera Moves 137 
Peg Movements in Traditional Animation 138 
Peg Movements in 3D Animation 139 
Editing Animation 148 
Editing for Feature Films 148 
Editing for Television Episodes 149 
Editing for Children’s Programming 149 
Editing for Internet Downloads 150 
Games 151 
Conclusion 154 
Index 155 


vii 


This page intentionally left blank 


Foreword by John Lasseter, 
Pixar 


| first became interested in animation as a kid. | watched every bit of it | could 
see, and found myself liking Disney animation and Warner Brothers cartoons 
more than most. | wondered what it was that set their work apart. As | learned 
more about animation | discovered that, arguably, it was their impeccable 
sense of timing. 


Time is the essence of animation. It is what makes animation different to 
other visual arts where the observer controls how much time a piece of art 

is viewed. With animation the observer is captive, usually sitting in a theater, 
watching it play out in front of them. The animator controls how much 

or how little time is spent on the animation. Therefore, it's the animator’s 
responsibility to control the timing of actions within the animation in order to 
capture the audience. 


Timing gives meaning to movement. The proper timing of an action 
establishes the idea behind the action as well as the audience's interpretation 
of it. Timing also reflects the weight and size of an object, conveys a 
character's thought process and emotions, and strengthens story points. 


When Timing for Animation was first published in 1981, | was an animator at 
Walt Disney Studios. Early on, | realized that the images in my head weren't 
translating onto the page exactly as I'd imagined. | would get caught up 

ona single drawing, erasing and reworking, but never quite capturing it. 
Hand drawn animation requires the ability to draw, and an understanding of 
motion and timing—how drawings change from one to another. Timing for 
Animation helped me focus solely on the timing aspects of animation and the 
importance of timing in the creation of quality animation. 


However, the major impact of Timing for Animation was revealed to me when | 
began working in computer animation, where | was no longer inhibited by my 
drawing skills. Animation isn’t about the single frame; it's about the motion as the 
whole. With computers you can cut and paste and iterate things over and over 
again. You can test things out without ever having to erase what you've drawn. 


Never in the history of animation have we had tools with these kinds of 
iterative properties. With computer technology, | quickly learned more about 
animation and the movement of objects than ever before. It was then that 

| realized that the lessons in this book about the timing of animation are so 
important. 


Foreword by John Lasseter, Pixar 


With computer animation software, anyone can make an object move. 

But getting the object to have a sense of weight, size, scale, motion and 
humor has to do with how you move an object. The computers don’t create 
animation for the animator—the animator still needs knowledge of the 
principles of timing in order to make the computer animation come alive. 
With any type of animation, the goal is always to make a character look like 
it's thinking—that all of its movements are generated by its own thought 
processes. No software program is going to give you that. 


In his preface to the 1981 version of Timing for Animation, John Halas said, 
‘..this book is primarily confined to hand drawn animation which up to this 
point in film history still comprises 90 per cent of all output in the animation 
medium: Times have certainly changed, in that now an awful lot of animation 
is done on computers, but the truth is that the principles of timing laid out in 
this book are more applicable than ever before. 


The knowledge to be gained from Whitaker and Halas’s Timing for Animation is 
just as relevant today as it was when it was first published and, in my opinion, 
even more so. | began sharing this book with colleagues in 1981, and continue 
to share it today in the hope of educating people who work with computer 
animation. This book shows just how essential principles like timing are for 
the art of animation. 


dl (ossehe. 


Preface to 2nd edition 


Whitaker and Halas's Timing for Animation has been a mainstay in the 
literature of animation instruction since its first edition was released in 1981. 
Sitting dog-eared and spine-split on desks and workstations around the 
world, it is the standard reference for all involved in making animation. This is 
true not only for those doing pure cartoons, but visual effects and interactive 
game design as well. Its only shortcoming is that it was originally written for 
a pre-digital age, so it offered few insights to the challenges of new media. 
With this update we will attempt to address this, and provide the animation 
novice—professional and fan alike—with a more complete look into the 
wonderful complexity that is modern animation and visual effects 
production. 


| knew John Halas, and admired his work at the Halas & Batchelor Studio in 
the UK. John’s writings were some of the first serious instructional works 

on creating animation | had read. Harold Whitaker was a top artist in the 
London animation scene, and was a mentor and teacher to a great many 
young animators. So, it was with understandable trepidation that | accepted 
the invitation from Focal Press to update this work. For those who have 


Tease | 
Nee = Ee 


FIGURE1 On every table and workstation. 


Preface to 2nd edition 


loved this book for so many years, fear not. It is not my intention to glue new 
arms on the Venus de Milo. Much of the original copy is undisturbed. | am 
merely adding notes to reflect some of the more modern practices that have 
changed animation since the first writing. George Bernard Shaw said Britain 
and America are two great nations divided by a common language. | will 
also try to clarify some differences in nomenclature between what is used in 
studios in the Anglo-Canadian Commonwealth and its Yankee counterparts. 
So Dope Sheets = Exposure Sheets, a Fade To = Dissolve, etc. 


Being one who has watched the Digital Age evolve since its earliest 
experiments, | am also sensitive to not dating the material. Large books that 
have painstakingly explained software programs from the 1980s and 1990s 
are now considered quaint, but irrelevant. Animator Jim Hillin stated it nicely, 
‘In computers, today’s groundbreaking innovation is tomorrow’s screen 
saver. The modern pace of technological development has become so rapid 
that some animators complain they must learn a new software system with 
each new project. So, | will not dwell on the nuances of a specific animation 
program. | even have to catch myself when | refer to the final product as a 
‘film, since many projects are now delivered as a digital file. Celluloid film 
itself has become an endangered species. When | now use the terms ‘film’ or 
‘filming; it will have to be in a more symbolic sense. 


The strength of Timing for Animation is in its simplicity and directness to 
whatever purposes you put its principles. You will find that the precepts laid 
out between these covers are important to all who create a frame-by-frame 
performance, regardless of whether they use a stylus and digital tablet, clay, 
cut-outs, some form of live-actor performance capture, or a pencil and paper. 


Hopefully, despite my fingerprints on the finish, Timing for Animation will 
continue to be a vital text for anyone who is serious about creating 
animated film. 


Tom Sito 
Hollywood, 2009 


xii 


Preface to 1st edition 


The passage of time has fascinated artists, scientists and theologians 

for thousands of years. Naturally they have attributed to it different 
interpretations, different implications and different conclusions. Nevertheless 
there seems to be general agreement on one aspect of time; that we are all 
conditioned by it and that, whether we like it or not, there is a time space into 
which we inevitably have to fit. 


Einstein, among other well-known names in the world of science, made 

a special study of time in relation to his research in physics. His theory of 
relativity maintains that space and time are merely different aspects of the 
same thing. Since then other physicists have pointed out that objects can be 
moved backward and forward in space, but nothing can be moved back in 
time. 


Another method of describing the concept of time is through the ‘three 
arrows of time’ The first ‘arrow’ is thermodynamic and can be seen operating 
when sugar dissolves in hot water. Second, is the historical ‘arrow, whereby a 
single-celled organism evolves to produce more complex and varied species. 
The third is the cosmological ‘arrow’ which is the theory that the universe 

is expanding from a ‘big bang’ in the past. This cosmic expansion cannot 

be reversed in time. While the principle of relationships between the ‘time 
arrows is still to be worked out on a scientific level, the actual application 

of it is constantly related to all work which utilizes it, such as music and the 
performing arts. In the latter it is one of the most important raw materials. 


In terms of animation, the idea of film time is one of the most vital concepts 
to understand and to use. It is an essential raw material which can be 
compressed or expanded, and used for effects and moods in a highly creative 
way. It is, therefore, essential to learn and to understand how time can be 
applied to animation. The great advantage of animation is that the animator 
can creatively manipulate time since an action must be timed prior to carrying 
out the actual physical work on a film. 


It is also essential to understand how the audience will react to the 
manipulation of time from their point of view. Time sense or‘a sense of 
timing, therefore, is just as important as color sense and skill of drawing or 
craftsmanship in film animation. 


It has to be realized that while a performance on stage and on the screen 
requires a basic understanding of how timing works, this book is primarily 


xiii 


Preface to 1st edition 


confined to hand drawn animation which up to this point in film history still 
comprises 90 per cent of all output in the animation medium. 


My co-author, who has drawn the majority of illustrations in this book, is 
reputed to be one of the world’s most skillful animators. | have had the 
privilege of working with him for 30 years and during this period he became 
the teacher of many outstanding animation artists of today. 


The book itself has been in production for five years and contains several 
decades of painful experience. We hope it will be of value to the new 
generation of artists and technicians. 


John Halas 
London, 1981 


xiv 


Acknowledgements 


lam grateful to Focal Press/Elsevier for giving me this opportunity, and my 
thanks to the Halas and Whitaker families for their cooperation. Also to Katy 
Spencer for heading the effort. I'd like to express my gratitude to Disney/ 
PIXAR Studios, Barry Weiss and SONY/Imageworks, PBS (WGBH/Cookie Jar), 
Gregg and Evan Spiridellis of Jibjab; John Hughes and Matt Derksen, Joe 
Ksander, Seth Cobb and Jaqueline Rosado of Rhythm & Hughes Studio. 
I'd also like to note a number of top animation professionals whose advice, 
particularly on the differences between traditional animation drawing and 3D 
Digital techniques, has been extremely helpful. Namely Mark Farquhar, Dan 
Lund, Kevin O'Neill, Steve Wood, Paul Teolis, David Valera, Robert Crawford, 
legendary Disney effects animator Dorse Lanpher, and my wife Pat Sito. I'd like 
to also thank Brian Barsky of Cal St. Berkeley for his notes on the manuscript. 


TS 
2009 


XV 


This page intentionally left blank 


Introduction: General Principles of Timing 


Introduction: General Principles of Timing 


In a film, ideas must come over immediately to the audience. There is no 
chance to turn back, as with a book, and reread a section. 


The ‘readability’ of ideas depends on two factors: 


1. Good staging and layout, so that each scene and important action is 
presented in the clearest and most effective way. 

2. Good timing, so that enough time is spent preparing the audience for 
something to happen, then on the action itself, and then on the reaction to 
the action. If too much time is spent on any one of these things, the timing 
will be too slow and the audience's attention will wander. If too little time is 
spent, the movement may be finished before the audience noticed it, and 
so the idea is wasted. 


To judge these factors correctly depends upon an awareness of how the 
minds of the audience work. How quickly or how slowly do they react? How 
long will they take to assimilate an idea? How soon will they get bored? This 
requires a good knowledge of how the human mind reacts when being told 
a story. It is also important to remember that different audiences react in 
different ways. So, for instance, an educational film for children would be 
timed in a different way from an entertainment film for adults, which requires 
a much faster pace. 


Animation has a very wide range of uses, from entertainment to advertising, 
from industry to education and from short films to features. Many modern 
live action fantasy films contain as much animation as a cartoon film. Motion 
picture visual effects, interactive games and websites are heavily dependent 
upon knowledge of animation techniques. Different types of animation 
require different approaches to timing. 


Timing for TV Series 


Because television production requires large amounts of screen time, TV 
animation has to be planned out carefully, with economy in mind. This 
approach is generally known as ‘limited animation’ With limited animation as 
many repeats as possible are used within the 24 frames per second. A hold is 
also lengthened to reduce the number of drawings. As a rule not more than 
six drawings are produced for one second of animation. Limited animation 
requires almost as much skill on the part of the animator as full animation, 
since he or she must create an illusion of action with the greatest sense of 
economy. 


Timing for Full Animation 


Full animation implies a large number of drawings per second of action. Some 
action may require that every single frame of the 24 frames within the second 


Timing for Animation 


be animated in order to achieve an illusion of fluidity on the screen. Neither 
time nor money is spared on animation. As a rule only, TV commercials and 
feature-length animated films can afford this luxury. 


Animation is expensive and time-consuming. It is not economically possible 
to animate more than is needed and edit the scenes later, as it is in live action 
films. In cartoons, the director carefully pre-times every action so that the 
animator works within prescribed limits, and this way does not waste time 
doing unnecessary drawings. 


Ideally, the director should be able to view the rough tests of the film as it 
progresses, and so have a chance to make adjustments. But often there is no 
time to make corrections in limited animation, and the aim is to make the 
animation work the first time. 


Timing in General 


Timing in animation is an elusive subject. It only exists whilst the film is being 
projected, in the same way that a melody only exists when it is being played. 
A melody is more easily appreciated by listening to it than by trying to explain 
it in words. So with cartoon timing, it is difficult to avoid using a lot of words 
to explain what may seem fairly simple when seen on the screen. 


Timing is also a dangerous factor to try to formulate—something which works 
in one situation or in one mood, may not work at all in another situation or 
mood. The only real criterion for timing is: if it works effectively on the screen 
it is good, if it doesn't, it isn’t. 


So if having looked through the following pages you can see a better way to 
achieve an effect, then go ahead and do it! 


In this book we attempt to look at the laws of movement in nature. What do 
movements mean? What do they express? How can these movements be 
simplified and exaggerated to be made ‘animatable’ and to express ideas, 
feelings and dramatic effects? The timing mainly described is that which is 
used in so-called ‘classical’ or ‘full’ animation. To cover all possible kinds of 
timing in all possible kinds of animation would be quite impossible. 


Nevertheless we hope to provide a basic understanding of how timing in 
animation is ultimately based on timing in nature and how, from this starting 
point, it is possible to apply such a difficult and invisible concept to the 
maximum advantage in film animation. 


What is Good Timing? 


Timing is the part of animation which gives meaning to movement. Movement 
can easily be achieved by drawing the same thing in two different positions 
and inserting a number of other drawings between the two. The result on 

the screen will be movement, but it will not be animation. In nature, things 


Introduction: General Principles of Timing 


do not just move. You can draw a circle and declare it to be anything from a 
soap bubble to a cannon ball. We the audience will only understand what it is 
when we see how it moves and interacts with its environment. Newton's first 
law of motion stated that things do not move unless a force acts upon them. 
So in animation the movement itself is of secondary importance; the vital 
factor is how the action expresses the underlying causes of the movement. 
With inanimate objects these causes may be natural forces, mainly gravity. 
With living characters the same external forces can cause movement, plus the 
contractions of muscles but, more importantly, there are the underlying will, 
mood, instincts and so on of the character who is moving. 


In order to animate a character from A to B, the forces which are operating to 
produce the movement must be considered. Firstly, gravity tends to pull the 
character down towards the ground. Secondly, their body is built and jointed 
in a certain way and is acted on by a certain arrangement of muscles which 
tend to work against gravity. Thirdly, there is the psychological reason or 
motivation for their action—whether they are dodging a blow, welcoming a 
guest or threatening someone with a revolver. 


A live actor faced with these problems moves their muscles and limbs and 
deals with gravity automatically from habit, and so can concentrate on acting. 
An animator has to worry about making their flat, weightless drawings move 
like solid, heavy objects, as well as making them act in a convincing way. In 
both these aspects of animation, timing is of primary importance. 


Timing for Animation 


"THE FLOOD" 


Fade in image of false god with 
people worshipping it. 


Narration: "God saw how corrupt 
the earth had become, - " 


Zoom back to long shot corrupt- 
Jooking city. 


" . for all the people on earth 
had corrupted their ways." 


Pan and track to Noah. (Ark 
already buijt in background) 


"So God said to Noah - * 


Mix to animals going up ramp 
two by two. 


" . 'Bring into the ark two of 
all living creatures, male and 
female - " 


Closer shot of animals going up 
ramp. 


" . to keep them alive with you'". 


FIGURE 2 Part of the working 
storyboard of The Story of the Bible by 
Halas & Batchelor. At this stage the 
director works out the smooth visual 
flow of the film, the editing, camera 
movements, and so on. All these 
elements combine to tell the story in 
an interesting way. 


Mix to birds flying in two by 
two. 


"Two of every kind of bird - " 


The Storyboard 


A smooth visual flow is the major objective in any film, especially if it is an 
animated one. Good continuity depends on coordinating the action of the 
character, choreography, scene changes and camera movement. All these 
different aspects cannot be considered in isolation. They must work together 
to put across a story point. Furthermore the right emphasis on such planning, 
including the behavior of the character, must also be realized. 


The storyboard should serve as a blueprint for any film project, and as the 
first visual impression of the film. It is at this stage that the major decisions 
are taken as far as the film's content is concerned. It is generally accepted that 
no production should proceed until a satisfactory storyboard is achieved and 
most of the creative and technical problems, which may arise during the film's 
production, have been considered. 


There is no strict rule as to how many sketches are required for a film. It 
depends on the type, character and content of the project. A rough guideline 
is approximately 100 storyboard sketches for each minute of film. If, however, 
a film is technically complex, the number of sketches could double. For a TV 
commercial, more sketches are produced as a rule because there are usually 
more scene changes and more action than in longer films. 


Traditional Storyboards 


The original form of storyboards originated in the 1920s, when artists would 
pin up their gag ideas on a corkboard on the wall. The idea quickly expanded 
and a specialist arose: the gag-man or storyboard artist. He or she would 
create a continuity of drawings delineating the cinematic flow of the film 
project to come. All the starts and stops of a potential character's actions 
would be spelled out in a series of sketches. These drawings could be ‘pitched’ 
or discussed openly in story-sessions, then photographed and matched to a 
rough soundtrack to further clarify what the final film might look like. These 
storyboard films have been referred to in the past with various names: the 
Animatic, Workreel, Storyreel or Leica reel. 


The finished quality of the artwork varied according to the demands of the 
project. A storyboard only to be seen inside the company by the creative 

staff could be drawn quick, rough, and to-the-point while a storyboard 

to be shown to commercial clients or other outsiders, not used to rough 
drawings, would be highly polished and slick. Filmmakers have added accents 
like elaborate soundtracks, temporary background music and after-effects 
technology to‘sell the idea’ of the film. 


The important point is to convey an idea of the flow of the narrative, and to 
explore the visual possibilities for additional drama or humor. Live action 
filmmakers, from Cecil B DeMille to Steven Spielberg, have relied upon 
storyboards to anticipate potential problems and grasp the impending 


The Storyboard 


Timing for Animation 


production issues of a film. This way they could formulate a strategy long before 
expensive shooting with full crew, movie stars and location permits commenced. 


Live action storyboards tend to emphasize frame composition and mis- 
en-scene or cinematic narrative, and do not focus upon the individual actor’s 
performance. Some actors make it a personal rule not to look at storyboards 
so as not to be influenced. That's why, in live action storyboards, the figure’s 
individual performances are downplayed. By contrast, storyboards for 
animated films place great emphasis upon the character’s performance and 
what they are thinking or feeling. 


In live action, the unit of the film known as ‘the scene’ can be made up of 
dozens of individual shots and can last a few minutes, for example Alfred 
Hitchcock's shower scene from the film Psycho, while in an animated film 
each individual cut is called a ‘scene’ and the sum of all these cuts constitutes 
a‘sequence; like the ‘under the sea’ sequence in Walt Disney Pictures’ The 
Little Mermaid. In television production, the emphasis of storyboards is on 
economy: many reused scenes, simpler staging than a theatrical, relying on 
the dialog to carry a story more than complex pantomime action. 


FIGURE 3 From Disney/PIXAR’s A 
Bug's Life drawn by Nate Stanton and 
Joe Ranft. The storyboard drawings 
themselves are quickly done and 
easily replaceable, but contain all the 
essentials of the movement in each 
scene. (Copyright ©1998 Disney 
Enterprises, Inc/PIXAR. 


The Storyboard 


Digital Storyboards 


Since the 1990s, computers have become part of the storyartists’ tools. In 
the past, traditional storyboards were sent out to be photographed by a 
cameraperson using a down-shooter or rostrum camera (UK), and then the 
film was developed, cut together and matched to a soundtrack by an editor. 
This was a process that took several days at its fastest. Now, the storyartists 
alone have the power to create storyreels on their laptop computers, with 
multiple soundtracks and effects, all with an instantaneous playback. 


This opens up new possibilities, but it also places increased responsibility 
upon the storyartist. He or she has to be much better versed in film editing 
and composition. There is no longer a quality control person to double-check 
for numerical errors or drawings out of order. The artist has to spend more 
time tightening and rendering the drawings, as well as additional digital 
effects and sound effects. 


There are many off-the-shelf storyboarding programs that are introduced 
each year, and large studios customize their own proprietary programs. Most 
programs can be classified into the categories of 2D and 3D. 


Prod.#°70'O page 7, 


sc. CONT = pane. 3 BG. 


sc. 30 PANEL ZL. aa, LOS 


=s \ 
| X#—_>}—_ 4 Pe 
Ee BEE 7) es ee 


“A 2 
SS) a | 2 
hl i i ll 


“CWOSE ON Get. SAE PAleeS 00M our Kay ReSpondae ar Ani VET Uvb 
EZ FINGAZ TAR DiALooveE ARMS LIFT To GIVE BETH A HV. 


si Bem (42 si Ray (44 on 


—— 


NO, BECAUSE YoU NOW TO kL You. C'MON), GIMME A Ue, 


TRANS TRANS — a at PT eal aia a 
(as 36 oth. (Wo) \ 
— a AGH IMG) 
Fy S23 


NOTE: Frame denotes standard TV Safe 


FACE Goes ANéky 
THEN CAM oN 


SLUG "Tp Kite qe Suu 


UG 


©2007 ¢CTv 


FIGURE 4 A Storyboard page drawn by Karl Toerge with director's notes added. From Click & Clack’s As the Wrench Turns (2008). (Copyright © CTTV LLC) 


7 


Timing for Animation 


2D Storyboarding 

This is a system where the drawings are still done on paper. They are then 
digitized into the computer and placed in order in the allotted time slots of 
the storyboard show file. This system can be used for so-called 2D animation 
programs like Flash and Toon Boom, as well as for films using 3D animation 
techniques like Maya. 


Many of these storyboard packages now allow for drawing your storyboards 
directly into the computer by using a tablet and digital stylus rather than 

a pencil and paper. The first tablets were a challenge to learn—they left 

no image on the drawing surface and the screen image appeared after an 
interval of time, which proved tedious. 


Current models are much faster and simpler for the artist to use. You can 

also set the frame size to stage shots for a widescreen or a television format 
project. The soundtracks can then be added, either from an external drive or 
downloaded from a network site. Large studios create a network site for an 
entire movie. This way the individual storyartist, after completing his or her 
portion of the film, can simply add it into the network file, or as we used to say 
‘cut it into the reel! 


3D Storyboarding—Pre-Visualization 

This is a process known since 1992 as’‘pre-visualization’ or ‘pre-vis: A virtual set is 
constructed in the computer, and the characters placed in them as maquettes, 
often just simple graphic symbols without color. When the various cuts are 
considered, the storyartist not only has to take into consideration the camera 
angle, but also the camera lenses to be used and the light sources in the scene. 


One single action of the actors could be restaged again and again from any 
angle in 360 degrees, with a myriad of possibilities for active camera moves. 
This all takes advantage of the in-the-round nature of 3D character animation. 


Many times the storyartist begins with a rough traditional storyboard, then 
creates the pre-visual set with characters. At this time the director, and in the 
case of live action the cinematographer and lighting supervisor, would be 
invited to have their input. 


In some big budget 3D films this process is done in the layout stage of 
production. This process was very useful when used with live-actor-based 
systems like motion capture or performance capture. The director films 
the action using several cameras, and all that data becomes the basis for 
staging the scene afterwards. Sometimes the camera position is the only 
thing captured, and it’s position is computed in real time so that a live 
view of the 3D scene can be displayed through it’s viewfinder. This allows 
the cameraperson to film a synthetic action as if it were a real event. This 
technique was used to support the ‘documentary’ hand-held feel in the Sony 
film Surf's Up, or the sweeping camera truck out as the Steward of Gondor 
aflame leapt to his death in The Return of the King. 


Timing for Animation 


Additional Storyboard Effects 


In the past, storyboards could be roughly drawn and simple enough to get 
the idea across quickly. Few outside of the production crew would see it, 
and they all understood its meaning to the final film. The exceptions were 
storyboards for commercial projects, which required a high degree of polish 
since some of the clients may have trouble imagining the finished product. 
But today many producers and backers of film are new to the field, so you 
have a better chance of getting your project approved by creating a look as 
close to the final film as is possible. Storyartists now routinely add temporary 
music and sound effects to their soundtracks and camera moves that in the 
past would only be suggested by red boxes and directional arrows. 


Because of easy-to-use effects programs for your personal computer, many 
storyartists enhance their completed reels with additional tricks, done using 
software such as Adobe After Effects. 


Programs such as these enable the storyartist to move a character through a scene 
like a simple cut-out. You can replace characters in a heavily detailed background 
without having to redraw that background over and over. You can add effects 

like real-looking smoke and flash-frames. You can also add motion blurs and fade 
through poses to approximate motion. Also, you can achieve a credible sense of 
depth by digitally breaking your composition into foreground, middle ground and 
background, and changing both field and focus in between them. 


In the 1930s the Walt Disney Studio created a huge complex apparatus called 
the ‘multiplane camera’ to create the same effect that you can now easily create 
on your computer. All these effects are usually added in after the reels’ timing is 
locked, because they require a lot of computer memory and work to redo. 


Arthur 13 


Ke (© 2008 WORM Leurstonal Foundation aad Hore Mims IR Procuctons Inc. 2 wubekBary of Cocke Jor Ereertainment inc Ad rghts reserved. All Marz Brown characters amd urdertying material 
Qrchating artwork) copyrighted by Mare Becwn. “Arthur”, “OW, and af citer Marc Brown characters and names originaby concetved by Marc Grown are Wrademarts of Mary Bryan. 


FIGURE 6 Arthur storyboard with director Greg Bailey's notes. (WGBH Educational Foundation/Cookie Jar Entertainment, underlying ©/™ in Arthur: Marc 
Brown.) 


10 


Responsibility of the Director 


Responsibility of the Director 


The director is responsible for decisions regarding the overall pacing and 
planning of the whole story or a particular sequence of it. This can involve 
sequences of several minutes’ duration or of only a few seconds. The director 
must also decide how these sequences should be organized into scenes. 


How long should each scene be? What should be the pace of the action in 
order to hold the interest of the audience? How can ideas in the story best 
be put over to the audience? These are the problems the director must 
solve. Going down to yet shorter periods of time, to individual actions, the 
responsibility is shared between the director and the animator. But the 
director still has overall control. 


The animator should, however, add some ideas of their own as to how the 
character's performance can be achieved—just as an actor would in live 
action. The smallest units—individual drawings and frames—are almost 
entirely the animator’s province, and this is where their particular skill lies. 
How does a ball bounce? How does a character react in surprise, or snap his 
fingers? These are problems the animator must solve by their feeling for and 
knowledge of the subject. 


An animated film usually takes a long time to produce. During this period, 
it is essential that the director should keep a constant check on how the 
production is progressing and how closely the original timing and concept 
have been followed. 


Most animated films are made to a predetermined length. ATV commercial 
must be an exact number of frames and a longer film will probably have to fit 
between fairly narrow limits. One of the director’s problems is to fit the action 
to the time available. 


First divide the story into sections or sequences of convenient lengths. Run 
through each section mentally as many times as necessary to absorb all 

the important story points. Then run through each section again, timing it 
mentally with a stopwatch. Add up all the timings to give an overall total. This 
is sure to be more or less wide of the mark. If it is fairly close, see whether a 
sequence can be adjusted to bring the total about right. If it is much too short, 
more business must be invented to fill the time available. If it is much too long, 
maybe a whole sequence must be omitted. 


11 


Timing for Animation 


The Basic Unit of Time in Animation 


The basis of timing in animation is the fixed projection speed of 24 frames per 
second (fps) for film and video. While other projection speeds have been used 
in the past, the standard projection rate for film of all formats—16 mm, 35 mm 
and 70mm remains 24 fps. On television and video this becomes 25 fps (PAL) 
or 30 fps (NTSC and some computer programs), but the difference is usually 
imperceptible. 


The thing to remember is that if an action on the screen takes one second it 
covers 24 frames of film, and if it takes half a second it covers 12 frames, and 
so on. 


For single frame animation, where one drawing is done for each frame, a 
second of action needs 24 drawings. If the same action is animated on double 
frames, where each drawing is photographed twice in succession, 12 drawings 


AIL 


La 


ib 
Nr ota 
| [Ray aee 


| na 
ri iii 


SECONDS 


Tae] 
| ome T 


tn, 


AK 


J 


=i 


FIGURE7 24 frames of film go 
through the projector every second 
(25 on television). This fixed number 


of frames provides the basis on which 
all actions are planned and timed by 
the director. 


12 


The Basic Unit of Time in Animation 


are necessary but the number of frames, and hence the speed of the action, 
would be the same in both cases. If creating animation to be matched against 
live action characters or settings, then the timing needs to be single frame. 

If you attempt to match exposures of two frames or longer to live action, the 
final composite scene will exhibit a noticeable skip or strobe in the motion. 


Whatever the mood or pace of the action that appears on the screen, whether 
it be a frantic chase or a romantic love scene, all timing calculations must be 
based on the fact that the projector continues to hammer away at its constant 
projection rate. That is—24 fps for film and either 25 fps or 30 fps for television 
and video depending on format. The unit of time within which an animator 
works is, therefore, {1/24 }sec, {1/25 }sec or {1/30 }sec and an important part of 
the skill, which the animator has to learn, is what this specific timing ‘feels’ like 
on screen. With practice the animator also learns what multiples of this unit 
look like—3 frames, 8 frames, 12 frames, and so on. 


' SEEOND OF FLY —— << 


JUUUUUU UOT 


). 
= 
Ml 


P 
if 
Ei 


Za. 3 4. 


i i He ATT | 
Ha 


: 
A a 
] ara 
| eee 
13 


«@\ 
on os od 


bots etagien ILKE NRE HAY 


Timing for Animation 


Timing for Television vs. Timing for 
Feature Films 


A director must be aware of the differences in the format they are working 
in. The demands of a big budget theatrical, or full-length project, differ from 
a television show, game or web animation, which must be done with an 
economy of resources. 


Whether it is done by computer, traditional or other mediums like claymation 
or puppets, quality feature animation is expensive. No expense can be 

spared if the finished film is expected to compete at the box office with the 
big live action Hollywood blockbusters. When audiences go to the theatre 
they expect ever-increasing cinematic experiences for their money. They are 
impressed with the technique for a moment, but then they expect a good 
story well told and visuals striking enough to merit not waiting to download it 
and watching it at home. 


Animation for television, the web or other smaller media presents a different 
series of challenges. The limits of budget and time constraints on producing 
hours of programming necessitate a rethinking of your creative strategies. 
So to keep the limited-animated projects lively, the plots are usually carried 


FIGURE 8 Arthur storyboard with along by means of dialog. Emphasis on dialog and sound over physical 

director Greg Bailey's slugs. (WGBH actions can save money. If the design of your show is more graphic and 
Educational Foundation/Cookie Jar simple, the audience is more tolerant of the simplicity of its movement, rather 
Entertainment, underlying ©/™ in than a very realistic design that does not seem to move enough. 


Arthur: Marc Brown.) 


es 
Action d 

—puvky’s Fans ceAe MEL LIV — Binney cAREYNE HEI cI 

+ LUFT HER 


a : 


‘S Co Saeeernen Seceetenes Penesten onsets en En pronsetons ine ocuteitay ohare Jr Reendanset is $8 peers, Aa Marc Brows characters and underlying manersal 
Marc Brown “Amur. “DW, ane af other Mare Brown chasacters and names originally conceived by Marc Brown are trademarks of Marc Brown. 


14 


Slugging 


Slugging 

In the production of a television series, keeping the shows at the required running 
length is vital to staying on budget and avoiding costly production overruns. If 
the contract with a television station is to deliver 12 episodes of 24 minutes 40 
seconds each with station breaks, you cannot give them 26 or 28 minutes with 
excuses. And it means money was wasted to animate and color scenes that were 
destined to be edited and thrown away to keep the show at length. 


To keep their shows at the required length, directors or a story editor will pre- 
time a script outloud with a stopwatch. Almost like a table-read in the theatre. 
Also, many animation directors resort to a system called ‘slugging’ 


While the storyboards are being done, the actors record their voices ‘railroad-style’ 
This means they do their takes in order, not allowing for any acting pauses or extra 
time for pantomime. On a series that is extra concerned with conserving their 
resources, the actors may do two or more complete episodes in one session. 


While the soundtrack is being edited from the collection of individual ‘takes, 
the director goes through the storyboard with a stopwatch and ‘slugs’ the 
board, which means noting the amount of time for the pauses in between 
lines of dialog. This way the amount of time needed for actions not using 
dialog can be roughly anticipated. This may be an action sequence like a 
fight, a ‘take’ or reaction of another character, a setting transition, a comedy 
pantomime or an establishing master shot of a new setting. 


Adding the total amount of slugs and dialog lengths together gives the 
director an idea of the total length of the show before any animator has 
begun to draw. Once the slugs are added to the edited soundtrack assembly, 
some further trimming is done to ensure the show stays at its required length. 


Some allowance should be given for the animator to expand the length of 
their scenes to create an inspired bit or performance. In this case, time will 
have to be lost somewhere else in the reel, but that can be done in the final 
edit. It is the director's decision. 


Another school of thought in TV production is to run the recording session 

in a block with all the voice actors as though it were a final performance. If 

this dialog is well recorded for maximum dramatic effect, lengths of pauses 
between phrases cannot be changed (except within very narrow limits) without 
destroying that effect. In this case, the overall timing of long sections of the 

film is governed entirely by the dialog. (There could be, however, considerable 
flexibility for more detailed timing within this fixed overall length.) 


In this approach, the director has room to manoeuvre sections. So, if the total 
timing for all the recorded dialog is subtracted from the required length for 
the whole film, this gives the amount of time that is available without dialog. 
This can then be split up and distributed throughout the film to give the best 
effect. The drawbacks are the difficulty in corralling all the voice actors to 
record in studio all at a set time, and making broad guesses at the microphone 
as to the length of some future bit of physical action. 


15 


Timing for Animation 


PROO.ND. C.6S7% WAME faR7 A. 


DESCRIPTION 


FIL. 2-S. INF 


—_ 


CLIENT 


oo 
sn 


FTG 


i 
 B 


oO 
Cc 


= 
ee I EIESS Sia 


"Maatoa) Curr 4- 
poet MAKE?F 
CY Mme -hYAnED| A- 


re [od MIKE ¢ ROBO 
& SHECONTS.- wubther 1S Thar?" 
GtoN + Roke 
CAN 4 Feaei an + PAN 
“ues fPoBacr 


: 
“\ 
Son 
al ‘© 
= 
AF 
| 8 
z 


CU. MARLON 


ae ret oe 
SG 
eee tao |e 
eae tear 
| sae leslie |e wrecker | 8-O] | |S 
ee pee ERM ol 8 = 
EE ee 
it ¢ GoEs our 

| PE eel eo Lee 

Sar RR ce Te 


FIGURE9 Part of a production breakdown chart. After the director has decided on the timing, scene continuity and so on, this information is transferred to 
a chart showing scene numbers, footages, background numbers, etc. As scenes are passed out and completed, boxes are shaded in on this chart so that the 
state of production can be seen at a glance. 


16 


Bar Sheets 


Bar Sheets 


From the advent of sound pictures until the Digital Revolution, the practice 
was that after the soundtrack was assembled with the called-for pauses or 
slugs timed accordingly to the story reel, the director fine-tuned his timing 
instructions on bar sheets. At Walt Disney these were also called ‘the greys. 
The director decides on scene continuity, the exact length of each scene and 
what action takes place within it. They also plan the pace of the storytelling 
and decide where tracks, pans, mixes, etc. are needed to put the story over in 
the best possible way. 


At the beginning of the film the director knows what is about to happen but 
the audience does not. The timing at the start of a film is, therefore, probably 
rather slow until the audience has been introduced to the location, the 
characters and the mood of the film. Once this has been done, the pace may 
build up to the climax if it is a short film. If it is a longer film, it may build up to 
a series of climaxes. 


The bar sheets were useful in that having defined the complete continuity of 
the film, with scene lengths and other information, they could also serve as 
the basic reference for the composer, and for the editor when the final film 
was assembled. 


Bar sheets are not used as much as they were before computers, but some 
studios still swear to their dependability. 


17 


Timing for Animation 


PROD. SEQUENCE 


P23, C 


TiS c 


C.U- Bare I DUE PEND. — SRack. Aree. 


AS MAK ¢ MoRerre. ENTER 


- eagoaene i | 
i OE Weer 
: 66 Sour 
- ike | 4 2 
ear | 
® (Ne ie Beate | Bedrevic- Blame. [ec 
a 3 ae aa sper | 
= __& “fo tS Tet TO 
318 eee ied ia same ce 
a ~ gS “Ti Lo Sarr | 
= (TA 
ied Be 3 
i) : is tS | 
7 a ae 
t | cme one [ - 
2 ae a ae 
aa mt 
‘remit nine ie ae 1D | ISA. 
12 | - t 2 _ ims 
f= ei 3D. | 
it 2 a 
NN ne | _i| | Sroe 
= fae] si Sma 


FIGURE 10 Part of a completed exposure sheet for an individual scene. Each horizontal division represents one frame of film. The director's timing is in the 
left-hand column and the camera instructions are on the right. The animator has written the numbers of their drawings in the middle six columns. 


18 


Timing for Traditional Animation: Exposure Charts or Exposure Sheets 


Timing for Traditional Animation: 
Exposure Charts or Exposure Sheets 


When the director has completed his/her timing notes, either on the reels 
or on bar sheets, the information is split up scene-by-scene ready for 
distribution to the animators. 


The timing is transferred to printed dope sheets (UK), which are known as 
‘exposure sheets’ or’X sheets’ in the USA. Some studios use charts with units of 
4 seconds (96 frames) on each sheet. Others, who primarily work in television 
where the speed of projection is 25 frames per second, use sheets in 100 
frame units, which provide 4 seconds of running time for television. 


Animation timing is usually indicated by the director in the left column of 
exposure charts so that the animator can work out the number of drawings 
required to complete each action in the other columns. This information is 
useful to all members of an animation unit: the animators, their assistants and 
the cameraman. Alongside the production of animation, the exposure charts 
are filled in according to the levels of cells or celluloids to be photographed, 
and eventually serve as guides for photography. 


The left column, or director's notes, is where many directors can affect their 
animator’s performance most directly. Legendary directors of the past like 
Chuck Jones used this place to put detailed instructions, complete with small 
sketches and diagrams. In the famous Simpsons TV series, the directors would 
have many pose drawings created and then time them precisely to maintain a 
continuity of performance. 


People have their own individual shorthand, but generally a horizontal 

line means a hold, a curve means an action of some sort, a loop means the 
anticipation to an action, a wavy line means a repeat cycle, and so on. If an 
action must take place on a certain frame, this is marked with a cross on the 
required frame. The action is also written out verbally with stage directions, 
repeat animation instructions and other relevant information. Some directors 
would even draw simple poses in the appropriate spaces to more clearly 
explain what they needed. 


Timing on X sheets is an extremely skilled operation. The director needs a 
great deal of experience to time out a film mentally before any drawing is 
done. When he or she commits their ideas to paper on the sheets, they are 
telling the story in terms of film, i.e. cutting, timing and pace (movement). The 
director has already animated the film in their mind. 


They must run forwards and backward through the story many times in 
their mind, relating the different parts of the story to one another in terms 
of dramatic flow. At the same time, they must be trying continually to judge 
what the effect will be on an audience who come fresh to it and who see the 
film through once only. 


19 


Timing for Animation 


Timing for an Overseas Production 


With today’s global productions it is not often that a director will have access to 
their staff under one roof. Many times they will be directing crews on the other 
side of the world, who may not speak their language. In this case, the director 
needs to be even more exact in the details of their notes on the dope/exposure 
sheets. Cultural differences and differing theatrical traditions must be taken 
into account when explaining their wishes. A simple gag like the magician 
pulling a rabbit out of a hat may be totally unknown to the artists being used. 
So the director's notes must be painstakingly specific and clear:‘Magician’s 

arm anticipates back 8 frames, thrusts into hat 4 frames, hold 12 frames, pull 
out rabbit 6 frames, hold and react 72 frames, etc’ and in any explanations care 
must be taken to avoid confusing local slang. Once when | said a character 

was feeling blue—meaning petit melancholia—the scene came back with the 
character painted with blue skin! Another time the storyartist left the note that 
the Superhero took off like a rocket, and the overseas artists literally morphed 
his body shape into a rocket before blasting off. 


The director timing for overseas production must be cognizant of the fact 
that many of the artists they will be using are being paid for the quantity 

of their output more than the quality. So they must not take for granted 

that the animators will add that extra sense of playful performance in their 
assignment. There will be exceptions, but most are only expected to move the 
characters from Point A to Point B, as indicated in the layouts and exposure 
sheets. If the director wants more than that they must take the initiative 

to add additional poses and specific notes to add to the performance, and 
maintain close communication with the overseas supervisors. 


20 


Timing for a 3D Digital Production 


Timing for a 2D Digital Production 


In many 2D animation programs the notes on paper exposure/dope sheets 
have been replaced by digital levels displayed upon the computer screen. The 
director times out their cuts using the story reel, almost as an editor would do 
traditionally. Then they create an extra level on which to write and draw their 
notes digitally using a stylus and tablet. The director may write on each frame, 
or create rough sketches for the animator to use as guideposts. All of this has 
the benefit of immediate and repeated playback. 


Timing for a 3D Digital Production 


When directing artists using a 3D program, in many cases there are no 
exposure sheets to work from, or additional columns on the reel. The director 
must get their wishes to the animator using storyreels (animatics) with many 
specific poses, then a detailed face-to-face conference to explain all they want 
done. In this face-to-face meeting, the director would give the animators 
quick sketches or diagrams to better illustrate his or her points. Director Brad 
Bird would have the reel projected upon a whiteboard for his staff and explain 
his wishes by drawing with a dry-erase marker right on the held frames. 


When directing for a 3D production to be done overseas, the director can 

be filmed doing the lecture, explaining his or her wishes, complete with 
illustrations. The overseas studio then sees this tape. Or arrangements can be 
made for a virtual teleconference. 


The animator takes the character with its built-in controls, called the ‘rig, and 
using the control levers creates the major poses, called ‘key frames: After the 
inbetweens and blurs are added, the speeds of the movement can be sped 

up or slowed down by moving the spacing bar or spline. The director can later 
correct the animator’s performance by also moving this bar. 


21 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 11 Actor Steve Buscemi with motion-capture sensor rig and rough character pose for the film Monster House. (MONSTER HOUSE © 2006 Columbia 
Pictures Industries, Inc. and GH One LLC. All Rights Reserved. Courtesy of Columbia Pictures.) 


22 


Timing for an Actor-Based Program (Performance or Motion Capture) 


Timing for an Actor-Based Program 
(Performance or Motion Capture) 


A popular animation technique that has grown since the turn of the 
Millennium has been motion or performance capture. Here an actor is covered 
in special sensors that record their motions in the computer in real time. In 
recording the scene, the director can interact with the actor much like a live 
action director does. He or she can use a live action cinematographer to set the 
camera angles and camera moves after the performance is done. It promises a 
potential way to create realistic-looking human animation more easily. 


The filmmaker must be cautioned that the acting avatar’s movements are not 

the final performance. After the performance is recorded in the computer, the 
animator must get in and flesh out the key frames of the animation. He or she 
moves frames closer or further apart, and augments or ‘pluses’ poses to complete 
the animated performance. Like in the old technique of rotoscope, where the 

live actor’s movement was traced over, the motion capture actor provides scale, 
staging and basic performance. But to be used to its greatest effect, the subtleties 
and nuances have to be gone over and enhanced by a key-frame animator. 


23 


Timing for Animation 


—— eS 


FIGURE 12 Animation consists of sequences of weightless drawings. The success of animation on the screen depends largely on how well these drawings 
give the impression of reacting in an exaggerated way when weight and forces are made to act upon them. 


24 


Animation and Properties of Matter 


Animation and Properties of Matter 


The basic question which an animator is continually asking themself, is:'‘What 
will happen to this object when a force acts upon it?’ And the success of their 
animation largely depends on how well this question is answered. 


All objects in nature have their own weight, construction and degree of 
flexibility, and therefore each behaves in its own individual way when a force 
acts upon it. This behavior, a combination of position and timing, is the basis 
of animation. Animation consists of drawings, which have neither weight nor 
do they have any forces acting on them. In certain types of limited or abstract 
animation, the drawings can be treated as moving patterns. However, in order 
to give meaning to movement, the animator must consider Newton's laws of 
motion, which contain all the information necessary to move characters and 
objects around. There are many aspects of his theories which are important 
in this book. However, it is not necessary to know the laws of motion in their 
verbal form, but in the way which is familiar to everyone, i.e. by watching 
things move. For instance, everyone knows that things do not start moving 
suddenly from rest—even a cannonball has to accelerate to its maximum 
speed when fired. Nor do things suddenly stop dead—a car hitting a wall of 
concrete carries on moving after the first impact, during which time it folds 
itself rapidly up into a wreck. 


It is not the exaggeration of the weight of the object which is at the centre 
of animation, but the exaggeration of the tendency of the weight—any 
weight—to move in a certain way. 


The timing of a scene for animation has two aspects: 


1. The timing of inanimate objects. 
2. The timing of the movement of a living character. 


With inanimate objects the problems are straightforward dynamics. ‘How long 
does a door take to slam?’ ‘How quickly does a cloud drift across the sky?’ 
‘How long does it take a steamroller, running out of control downhill, to go 
through a brick wall?’ 


With living characters the same kind of problems occur because a character 
is a piece of flesh which has to be moved around by the action of forces on it. 
In addition, however, time must be allowed for the mental operation of the 
character, if he is to come alive on the screen. He must appear to be thinking 
his way through his actions, making decisions and finally moving his body 
around under the influence of his own will-power and muscle. 


25 


=! Timing for Animation 


ACTVAL- CARTOON 


| we 
a 
> 


FIGURE 13 Cartoon is a medium of 
caricature —naturalistic action looks 
weak in animation. Look at what 
actually happens, simplify down to 
the essentials of the movement and 
exaggerate these to the extreme. 


Movement and Caricature 


Movement and Caricature 


The movement of most everyday objects around us is caused by the effect of 
forces acting upon matter. 


The movement of objects becomes so familiar to us that, subconsciously, 
these movements give us a great deal of information about the objects 
themselves and about the forces acting on them. This is true not only of 
inanimate objects, but also of living things—especially people. 


The animator’s job is to synthesize movements and to apply just the right 
amount of creative exaggeration to make the movement look natural within 
the cartoon medium. 


Cartoon film is a medium of caricature. The character of each subject and the 
movement it expresses are exaggerated. The subjects can be considered as 
caricatured matter acted upon by caricatured forces. 


Cartoon film can also be a dramatic medium. This particular quality can be 
achieved, among other means, by speeded up action and highly exaggerated 
timing. The difference between an action containing caricature, or humor or 
drama, may be very subtle. Eventually, with enough experience in animation 
timing, it becomes possible to emphasize the difference. 


Caricatured matter has the same properties as natural matter, only more so. To 
understand how cartoon matter behaves it is necessary to look more closely 
into the way matter behaves naturally. 


27 


Timing for Animation 


Cause and Effect 


There is a train of cause and effect which runs through an object when it 

is acted upon by a force. This is the result of the transmission of the force 
through a more or less flexible medium (i.e. caricatured matter). This is one 
aspect of good movement in animation. 


An animator must understand the mechanics of the natural movement of 
an object and then keep this knowledge in the back of their mind whilst 
concentrating on the real business of animation. This is the creation of mood 
and conveying the right feeling by the way an action is done. 


Examples of cause and effect: 
Figs AandB 


A rope wrapped around anything and pulled tight has the tendency shown. 
How far the reaction goes depends on: 


i The strength of the forces pulling the rope. 
ii The flexibility or rigidity of the object being squeezed. 


Exaggerate the tendency. 


28 


Cause and Effect 


Figs C, DandE 


On the seesaw, the end of the plank with the smaller stone tends to stay 
where it is to begin with because of its inertia, so bending plank D. A moment 
later it starts to accelerate and the plank springs back with the opposite 
curvature causing the stone to whizz out of the screen, E. 


Figs F, Gand H 
The man is bending over to pick up something. His reaction when pricked is: 
GA reflex jerk to remove his behind from the pin. 


HA look of surprise or horror as he turns to see what is happening. 


FIGURE 14 AA rope wrapped round something. B The ends of the rope are pulled tight. C A stone on one end of a seesaw. D and E A bigger stone drops 
onto the other end. F A man stoops to pick something up. G and H He reacts when pricked by a pin. 


29 


Timing for Animation 


i 
WEP 


FIGURE 15 AA cannon ball needs a lot of force to start it moving. Once moving, it takes a lot of stopping. B A balloon needs only a small force to move it, 
but air resistance quickly brings it to rest. In both these examples a circle is being animated. The timing of its movements can make it look heavy or light on 
the screen. 


30 


Newton’s Laws of Motion 


Newton’s Laws of Motion 


Every object or character has weight and moves only when a force is applied 
to it. This is Newton's first law of motion. An object at rest tends to remain at 
rest until a force moves it, and once it is moving it tends to keep moving ina 
straight line until another force stops it. 


The heavier an object is, or strictly speaking the greater its mass, the more 
force is required to change its motion. A heavy body has more inertia and 
more momentum than a light one. 


A heavy object at rest, such as a cannonball, needs a lot of force to move 

it (Fig. A). When fired from a cannon, the force of the charge acts on the 
cannonball only whilst it is in the gun barrel. Since the force of the explosive 
charge is very large indeed, this is sufficient to accelerate the cannonball to a 
considerable speed. A smaller force acting for a short time, say a strong kick, 
may have no effect on the cannonball at all. In fact it is more likely to damage 
the kicker's toe. However, persistent force, even if not very strong, would 
gradually start the cannonball rolling and it would eventually be traveling 
fairly quickly. 


Once the cannonball is moving, it tends to keep moving at the same speed 
and requires some force to stop it. If it meets an obstacle it may, depending on 
its speed, crash straight through it. If it is rolling on a rough surface it comes 
to rest fairly soon, but if rolling on a smooth flat surface, friction takes quite a 
long time to bring it to rest. 


When dealing with very heavy objects, therefore, the director must allow 
plenty of time to start, stop or change their movements, in order to make their 
weight look convincing. The animator, for their part, must see that plenty of 
force is applied to the cannonball to make it start, stop or change direction. 


Light objects have much less resistance to change of movement and so 
behave very differently when forces act on them. A toy balloon (Fig. B) needs 
much less time to start it moving. The flick of a finger is enough to make 

it accelerate quickly away. When moving, it has little momentum and the 
friction of the air quickly slows it up, so it does not travel very far. 


The way an object behaves on the screen, and the effect of weight that it 
gives, depends entirely on the spacing of the animation drawings and not on 
the drawing itself. It does not matter how beautifully drawn the cannonball 
is in the static sense—it does not look like a cannonball if it does not behave 
like one and the same applies to the balloon, and indeed to any other object 
or character. 


31 


=! Timing for Animation 


Objects Thrown Through the Air 


Objects Thrown Through the Air 


If an object is thrown vertically upwards, its speed gradually diminishes to 
zero (Fig. A). It then starts to accelerate downwards again. The height to 
which it rises depends on the speed at which it is thrown, but the rate of 
deceleration is the exact opposite of the acceleration as worked out on 
page 34. In fact the same scale can be used for both acceleration and 
deceleration. 


If a ball is thrown upwards at an angle, then its movement has two 
components: vertical and horizontal. Vertical speed diminishes to zero and 
increases again as it falls, whilst at the same time its forward movement 
remains fairly constant. This means the ball moves along a parabola (Fig. B). 


If a rubber ball is thrown down on a hard smooth surface, it moves with a 
series of bounces. The curve between one bounce and the next is again a 
parabola. The parabolas diminish in height each time, as some energy is lost 
by the ball on each bounce (Fig. C). 


If possible, drawings around the actual bounce should be spaced as in Fig. C. 
The drawing after the squash should overlap the squash drawing slightly, as 
the ball accelerates to its maximum speed again. On the remainder of each 
parabola, the drawings tend to bunch together at the top and spread apart at 
the bottom of the curve, as in Fig. B. 


If, when the ball is timed out at the required speed, there is a large gap 
between one drawing and the next, compared with the diameter of the 
ball, then it is a good idea to stretch the circle slightly into an ellipse in 
the direction in which the ball is traveling. This, possibly with speed lines 
added (see page 112), helps to lead the eye from one drawing to the next 
and smooth out the movement. This should not be overdone, however, 
particularly at slow speeds, as it may give a rather floppy effect to the ball. 


FIGURE 16 A The speed of a ball, rising vertically under the influence of gravity, gradually diminishes to zero. 
The same spacing of drawings can be used for its acceleration as it falls back to earth. B If the ball is thrown 
upwards at an angle, it travels in a parabola. C A rubber ball bouncing on a hard surface proceeds in a series of 


diminishing parabolas, as energy is lost on each bounce. D A cartoon character bounces in much the same way 
asa ball. 


33 


= Timing for Animation 


TIME (FRAMES ) 
O24 6 8 1 12 I4 (6 & 2 22 
ae 
pi tat tt ty 

CEPNEEEE EEE 
See Nee 
Sees Senne 


Rate eee See 
po ed NT oe, 
ee ea 
SR eAR SRE Bee 
pt AT 


Timing of Inanimate Objects 


Timing of Inanimate Objects 


An inanimate object that has weight and is being acted upon by known 
forces moves in a predictable way. As a simple example, consider an object 
falling from rest under the influence of gravity. Disregarding air resistance, 

all objects fall with the same acceleration, which is about 9.8 meters per 
second. In practice, of course, the buoyancy of the air makes a leaf behave 
very differently from a lump of lead when dropped. However, assuming that 
an object is dropped which has an average weight, then the distance it falls in 
time, ‘t; with an acceleration, ‘f; is given by the formula: 


Distance = 4 ft? 


= 4.9t? meters 


By substituting some numerical values for‘t, distances fallen are as follows: 


after second—0.08 meters 


second—0.3 meters 


1 
8 
ill 
4 
+ second—1.2 meters 

1 second—4.9 meters, etc. 

A graph with the time in frames plotted against the distance fallen gives a 
parabola (see Figure 17). At a projection speed of 24 frames per second, the 
object falls as follows: 


0.08 meters after 3 frames 

0.3 meters after 6 frames 

1.2 meters after 12 frames 

4.9 meters after 24 frames, etc. 


FIGURE 17 Speed chart ofan average In animation it is not usually necessary to work out a movement like this 


object falling under gravity. The air mathematically. It is all right if it looks right, and it looks right if the movement 
resistance affecting the fall of a feather, it’s based on is what actually happens in nature—simplified and exaggerated, 
ora heavy brick, must be taken into if necessary, for dramatic effect. 


account. Disregarding air resistance, 
an object falling from rest accelerates 
at a fixed rate. If the distance fallen is 
otted against the time taken, it gives 


a parabola. The vertical scale on the 
ight shows the distance fallen in a 


iven number of frames. Starting from 
est, whatever distance an object falls 


ina given time interval, it travels four 


imes as far in twice that interval. For 


example, it travels four times as far in 


8 frames as it does in nine. 


35 


FIGURE 18 A All objects moving 


in free flight under gravi 
arabolas. A thrown ha 


gravity, but the cente 
oes into orbit, when it 


lipse). B The center of 
an travels on a parabo 


oo => S 


Self travels on a parabola (unless it 


y move in 
mer spinning 


rough the air rotates round its center 


of gravity 


ravels on an 
gravity of a 
a when he 


jumps or dives throug 


he air. 


Rotating Objects 


Rotating Objects 


To say that a bouncing or thrown ball travels along a parabola really means 
that its center of gravity does so. The mass of any body acts as though 
concentrated at its center of gravity. 


Irregular Inanimate Objects 


If an irregular shaped object is falling or being thrown through the air, the 
movement of its center of gravity along a parabola can be timed. As most 
objects have a tendency to rotate when flying through the air, the object is 
then drawn pivoting by a fixed amount about the successive positions of the 
center of gravity along the parabola. For example, with a heavy hammer most 
of the weight is in the metal head and the center of gravity is therefore close 
to this end. This would produce successive positions of the hammer as in the 
illustration (Fig. A). The shape of the hammer and the speed and direction of 
rotation might vary but the principle of movement remains the same. 


In animation, if the speed of an object is sufficient, changes in perspective as 
the object rotates are not apparent. It is usually enough to have one drawing 
of the object with the position of the center of gravity marked on it. This 

can then be placed with the center of gravity over the required point on the 
parabola and traced off in this position. The center of gravity is then placed 
over the next successive point on the parabola, turned through the required 
angle, and traced off on this position, and so on. 


Animate Objects—Characters 


In an object whose shape is variable, such as a man, the position of the center 
of gravity also changes. If the man falls or jumps through the air, his center 

of gravity also travels along a parabola (Fig. B), even though the shape of 

his body changes and he may rotate in much the same way as an inanimate 
object. 


37 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 19 The action of a force through a flexible joint. A to E The movement of a stick when a force is applied to it through a flexible joint. The white stick 
moves as a result of the movement of the black stick. F The movement of three sticks flexibly joined together (drawings spread out side by side for clarity). 


38 


Force Transmitted Through a Flexible Joint 


Force Transmitted Through a Flexible Joint 


Imagine a length of wood with string fastened to one end of it, lying ona 
fairly smooth surface (Fig. A). Pull the stick towards the right, by means of the 
string, from a direction roughly at right angles to the length of the stick. The 
first thing that happens is that the string pulls taut. Obviously the stick is not 
going to move whilst the string is slack. The weight of the stick acts as though 
concentrated at its center of gravity, and so the stick as a whole does not start 
to move in the direction of the pull until its center of gravity is in line with the 
string. So the stick rotates until the axis of the stick and the string are in line, 
and then moves off (Fig. B). 


If instead of the string another stick is used, flexibly jointed to the first one 
(Fig. C), then something very similar to Fig. B occurs if the second stick is 
moved to the right. If the second stick (shown black) is now moved around 
as in Figs D and E, then the white stick moves more or less in the way shown, 
provided the joint is quite flexible. If the white stick is pushed around and is 
the prime mover, then the black stick behaves in a similar way to the white 
one in Figs D and E. 


The main characteristic of these movements in animation is that when the 
primary stick accelerates or changes direction, the successive drawings of the 
secondary stick overlap each other as the stick rotates. 


If three sticks are flexibly jointed together, and the lower stick is rocked to and 
fro fairly quickly, so that the effect of the momentum of the other two sticks 
becomes noticeable, the combined movement is similar to Fig. F. 


39 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 20 How flexible j 


nipulated affects the a 
umans as well as anima 
he equivalent in huma 
on page 40. B Note flexi 


Cand D Note flexibility of a 
is lowered and raised, and 


n 

S.A 
n 
y 


ick. E From the Hoffnung 
Orchestra showing movemen 


exible arm and loosely 


eld 


5 are 
ation of 
This is 

s of Fig. C 
of wrist. 
le as foot 
ing a 


Symphony 


of 
aton. 


Force Transmitted Through Jointed Limbs 


Force Transmitted Through Jointed Limbs 


In character animation, force is very frequently transmitted by means of more 
or less flexible joints. 


An animal or man can be thought of as a series of fairly loosely connected 
sections. A leg consists of the thighbone connected to a ball and socket joint 
at the hip; the lower leg, with a hinge joint at the knee; and the foot which is 
fairly flexibly jointed at the ankle. The arm is jointed from the shoulder in a 
similar way. So if a subject's shoulders are jerked backward, his hands tend to 
follow only after his arms are pulled into line with the centers of gravity of his 
hands (Fig. A). 


This is not strictly true, of course, with live characters because if the 
movement is slow enough, the muscles have time to contract and stop the 
arms straightening completely. Nevertheless the tendency is there, and it is 
these tendencies which the animator picks on and exaggerates. The faster the 
action, the greater the exaggeration. 


Hands and feet move in the same way as the white rods on page 38. They tend 
to rotate on their centers of gravity when the direction of movement changes. 
In Fig. B, with a flexible wrist, the hand tends to trail backward in the middle 
of a forward movement and in Fig. C the foot tends to trail in the direction it is 
coming from when the leg is lowered or raised, and in Fig. D during a kick. 


An object held loosely in the fingers behaves in a similar way when the hand 
is moved about (Fig. E). 


41 


Timing for Animation 


Spacing of Drawings—General Remarks 


When any object in nature moves from a rest point X and stops at a point, it 
has a tendency, owing to the properties of matter, to accelerate to a maximum 
speed in the middle of the movement and then slow down to a stop (Fig. A). 
Obviously there are an infinite number of variations in detail, but this is the 
general tendency. A piston going to and fro moves more slowly at the ends 

of its movement, and so in animation the drawings are closer together at the 
ends of the movement than in the middle. This kind of movement is called 
‘simple harmonic motion; and can be arrived at by projecting equidistant 
points on the circumference of a circle onto a straight line (Fig. B). 


In animation it is sometimes difficult to graduate the space between drawings 

in this way and so usually an approximation is made by halving, rehalving and 

halving again the distance to be traveled, according to the time available. In 
FIGURE 21 A An object moving fro some cases distances are split for convenience into thirds, or even quarters, 
one point to another accelerates from although other proportions are usually impracticable (Fig. C). 
est to. a maximum speed and then 
decelerates to a stop. B The projectio 
of the positions of a point moving 
ound a circle on to a straight line gives 
he positions of a point moving up and 
down the line, with simple harmonic 
otion. 


42 


Spacing of Drawings—General Remarks 


A human figure moving to and fro, sawing for example, moves in a similar way 
to a piston. The body weight moves forward, slows down, changes direction 
and starts to move backward, slows down, changes direction, starts to move 
forward, and so on. The general weight of the body moves forward and 
backward, and the drawings are therefore spaced in the same way as those for 
a piston. The spacing of the drawings of the arm and saw are different from 
that of the weight of the body (see page 36) because the action of sawing 
requires manipulation of weight and muscle-power. 


C Methods of inbetweening which 

are used in various combinations 
depending on the speed of the 
movement. D A man sawing slows 
into and out of the two extremes of the 
movement (see also page 36). 


ERS | ~ _ ~~ EN AGREE | 
HALVES “THIRDS 
Cc 


Cian aa 


=! Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 22 AAsimple arm 


move 
begin 


ent, accelerating at the 


B A more violent point. Drawings 1-5 


antici 
shoot 


pate the movement, the hand 
5 out too far on 6—9 and returns 


to the final position on 10-12. CA 


kicki 
exam 


g donkey gives a more violent 
ple of overshooting. 


ning and decelerating at the end. 


Spacing of Drawings 


Spacing of Drawings 


As explained above, the basis of timing is the established film speed of 24 
frames per second. If, therefore, something moves from A to B in six frames, 
the drawings required to do this are spaced twice as far apart as they would 
be if the object moved from A to B in 12 frames—assuming single frame 
animation, or ‘ones, is used in both cases. 


Therefore, for an animator, the timing of an action is the same as deciding the 
number and spacing of the drawings or key poses needed to make up the 
action. 


How many drawings are needed, for example, to make a character point his 
finger off screen? It is necessary to know a number of things to answer this. Is 
the character slow or quick in his reactions? Is he pointing, for example, to a 
distant view or is he pointing to warn somebody that a car is about to run him 
down? Is it a full arm movement or a more restricted finger movement? 


If it is a fairly gentle movement, the action might take about 16 frames 

to complete, which on double frame animation, or ‘twos, would be eight 
drawings. If the arm is at rest at the beginning and end of the movement, then 
the drawings are spaced more closely at the beginning and end. This gives the 
impression that the arm is a fairly weighty object accelerating from rest and 
decelerating again at the end of the movement. 


45 


46 


Timing a Slow Action 


Timing a Slow Action 


Occasionally it is necessary to animate movements which strain the medium 
to its limit, such as slow movement. In a lyrical mood, slow motion or a 
comedy situation this may be unavoidable. The closer drawings are to each 
other, the slower the movement appears. On the other hand, the wider the 
spacing between drawings, the quicker it looks on the screen. But there is a 
limit in both directions. 


Closely spaced drawings tend to jitter if not drawn with great accuracy and 
if the distances are not worked out precisely. In cartoons, as a rule, very 

slow motion should be avoided. It is better left to live action. If it must be 
done, make sure that the movement contains sufficient rhythm, bounce and 
flexibility. The drawings also need extremely careful tracing. Sometimes it 

is preferable to advance the animation by short camera dissolves (a camera 
fade of one image into another) or by adding digital motion blur, rather than 
laboriously filling in every inbetween. 


If the animated drawings are close and accurate enough, three or even four 
frame exposures are possible per drawing. In close up, however, this might 
appear too jerky. It is highly advisable to study an animation line test to 
ensure that the desired effect has been achieved. Sometimes Japanese and 
Korean anime will allow for timing characters on fours or even six frame 
exposures, but this is not so much an attempt to recreate natural motion, as a 
stylized convention it's audience had learned to accept. 


FIGURE 23 Enlarged film frames from Animal Farm showing an extremely slow movement of the character 
Napoleon ascending to the top of a barn on a ladder. Occasionally, as in this case, it is permissible to apply 
three frames for each movement. The animation is so slow and the intervals are so close to each other that the 
movement does not appear jerky and the audience will not notice the difference. 


47 


48 


Timing for Animation 


Timing a Fast Action 


Fast rather than slow action suits animation best. It gives the animator an 
opportunity to create an illusion of pace and energy which is much more 
difficult to achieve with live action. 


The important point to remember about timing fast action is that the faster 
the movement is, the more important it is to make sure the audience can 
follow what is happening. The action must not be so fast that the audience 
cannot read it and understand the meaning of it. 


With fast action anticipation is very important indeed. The character prepares 
for the action he is about to do so that the audience is ready for the quick 
movement when it comes, and so can follow it even though it may be very 
rapid. In an extreme case, for example where a character zips off screen, the 


Timing a Fast Action 


anticipation alone is sufficient and it is possible to miss out the zip altogether or 
perhaps dissolve it into a puff of smoke or ‘whizz’ lines (see page 113). Modern 
digital techniques enable the artist to add a motion blur in between fast key 
poses, imitating the eye’s inability to see fast actions as anything but a blur. 


Of course there are times when anticipating every movement becomes 
tedious and it is necessary for dramatic effect to shock the audience with a 
surprise move. For example, if one character delivers a punch on the chin 

of another, it would be necessary to freeze the position of the fist at the 

end of the punch long enough for the audience to ‘catch up’ with what has 
happened. It might give more impact to shoot the fist out too far, bringing it 
back relatively slowly to the hold. This would give a bunching together of the 
drawings at the end of the punch, which would make it easier to read. 


FIGURE 24 A fast punch. The 

character animates fairly slowly out of 
hold at drawing 1i e anticipation 
at 11. He then accelerates into the 


So 
a 


forward stroke on 17 and into the 
contact on drawing 19. A white ‘splat’ 
originates from the point of contact 
and continues for the following two 
drawings. The fist continues quickly 
round on 21 and the body comes to a 
freeze position on 27. 


=! Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 25 AThe character runs in and comes to a hold. He lands in a squash position and rebounds too high before coming to pose. B To go into walk, he 
shifts his weight over his right foot so that he can lift his left foot, at the same time leaning into the direction of the walk. C Here he moves from the same 
pose into a run cycle. 


50 


Getting Into and Out of Holds 


Getting Into and Out of Holds 


The time it takes to reach a hold depends on the momentum of the object 
or character. A heavy man running takes several seconds to come to a stop, 
whilst someone leaning forward to listen simply slows into a stop. ln some 
studios this is called ‘cushioning an action’ 


Avoid having all parts of the figure coming to a stop at the same time. If a 
character jumps into a scene, for example, he might come in on an arc, squash, 
then recoil upwards too far before coming to rest in the final pose. Even after 
his body has stopped it may be effective to have his arms continue for another 
few frames. If the character has any loose extremities, such as coat-tails or 
feathers in his hat, these must take some time to stop. These would probably 
be drawn on separate eel levels to allow for this. When a figure comes to a 
hold, any extremities which have been trailing behind keep on moving then 
settle back, perhaps too far, before coming to rest (see page 61). 


If a character makes a quick movement of surprise or perhaps winces, which 
shows a rapid tightening up of the muscles or a reflex withdrawal from 
danger, then he must go into the hold quickly. If the hold is made slowly in 
this case, the feeling of surprise is lost. With a quick stop such as this, it is even 
more important to have an overlap on the movement of the arms or hair, for 
example, to soften the sudden stop. 


When moving out of a hold—'cushioning out; the spacing of the drawings 
usually gradually increases if the movement is fairly gentle. Any extremities 
hang back slightly until they are pulled along by the body. If the character 
goes into a more violent action, such as starting to walk, then the movement 
should be anticipated. The figure should draw back slightly before moving 
forward. As the front foot is raised the body begins to fall forward into the 
first step. If going into a run, the anticipation is more violent, with the body 
perhaps twisting away from the eventual direction of movement as the front 
foot is raised, and then leaning forward into the direction of movement so 
that the push on the back foot propels the body forwards. 


51 


Timing for Animation 


Single Frames or Double Frames? 
Ones or Twos? 


Most things can be animated sufficiently well on double frames, ‘twos, to 
make the added expense of single frames unnecessary. Sometimes an effect 
does not work when double framing is used, and then the extra drawings 
must be done. It is dangerous to animate on double frames during a table 
move ‘pan’ and/or camera track ‘zoom’ or ‘truck: These moves are usually 
done on single frames for smoothness and the combination of doubles and 
singles can produce effects of ‘jitter’ Animation done on pegs which move on 
single frames, ‘ones, must also be animated on single frames (see page 138). 
Animation to be matched to live action figures or characters has to be done 
with single frames or ‘ones, since that would match the live action frames. 


Broadly speaking and disregarding the above, the faster the action the more 
necessary it is to use single frames. In slow action, consecutive drawings are 
fairly close and the eye has no difficulty in jumping from one to the next, but 


52 


Single Frames or Double Frames? Ones or Twos? 


in fast action the timing may call for the drawings to be so widely spaced on 
double frames that the eye can no longer connect them up. Animation on 
single frames obviously halves the distance between consecutive drawings 
when the action is at the same speed on doubles. 


When an action is very quick it is sometimes impossible to put enough 
information into the animation at double frames to explain what is 
happening. In a very fast run, which may need a cycle of eight frames or four 
frames to a step, then double frame animation of two drawings per step just 
does not work on the screen. This, therefore, must be done on singles, giving 
four drawings per step, although even these may need drybrushing or blur to 
make the action work. 


Vibrating movements may also need single frames. A vibrating movement 
ABABAB, etc., with two frames on A and B, gives a surprisingly slow 
reverberation, so if a more snappy result is needed, single frames must be 
used (see page 62). 


FIGURE 26 In 
id action, inevitably single frame 


ming a fast and continuous 


animation should be used. In the case of 
is quick dance fitted to a strong music 
eat of a folk or square dance, no other 
ethod would work. The figures tur 
around 360° and a very careful follow- 


rough animation is essential to maintain 


e shapes of the figures. Once one cycle is 


animated, it is possible to repeat it several 


53 


Timing for Animation 


How Long to Hold? 
The general question of how long to hold subdivides into two questions: 


1. How long is it mechanically possible for the object to hold? 
2. How long is it necessary to hold to give the best dramatic effect? 


The first question applied to inanimate objects is simply a matter of whether 
the object is in stable equilibrium. 


With a living character, the same point applies. Once he has arrived in a stable, 
fairly comfortable-looking pose, he can hold it forever. On the other hand he 
should not hold at all, except for comic or other effect, in an off-balance pose. 
It does not matter how off-balance or awkward an extreme looks, provided it 
is reached properly and is moved out of fairly quickly. 


A drawing that works as a hold is really a different kind from a normal 
animation drawing that works as one of a series. A held drawing can usually 
be extracted from the animation and works when framed and hung on the 
wall, whereas most animation drawings do not. A held drawing normally has 
a balanced look to it, although the subject can be either in a state of tension 
or relaxed. A relaxed or passive pose can be held forever (listening, thinking, 


FIGURE 27 AAstatic gag, based on a joke drawing. 
The character raises the cymbals and holds there for 
24 frames before a pan away to another member of 
the orchestra. (From Symphony Orchestra by Halas and 
Batchelor.) D The’freeze’ position at the end of a fast 
throw, held for about 12 frames. 


54 


How Long to Hold? 


reading, etc). If the design of the characters is more graphic and stylized, then 
along hold is more believable than a realistically drawn figure held, which 
might look frozen to the audience. In the case of a realistic figure, a moving 
hold is desirable. The figure at rest blinks every three to five seconds, shifts its 
weight from one foot to another, etc. 


B The plug is held for 32 frames (with gurgling 
sound effect). CThe man stands up quickly and his 
body is held for 8 frames. E A ‘look’ off screen needs 
a hold of about 12 frames before cuffing to what 
the character sees. F Allow about 16 frames for 
each word of a title card for reading time. 


S000 


eee 
SIM OUST 


et 
teas 


‘* 


55 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 28 Since movement attracts the attention of the 
audience, their attention will be focused where motion takes 
place. A Simple anticipation of a grab. This can be more or less 
exaggerated according to circumstances. The character moves from 
rest into the anticipation at 2, then into the grab position at 3. 

B A more violent movement needing stronger anticipation. This is 


on 2, before the main action on 3. 


56 


Anticipation 


One of the tricks an animator has to learn is how to attract the attention of 
the audience to the right part of the screen at the right moment. This is of 
great importance to prevent the audience missing some vital action and 

so the thread of the story. Although the audience is a group of individuals, 
the human brain works in a predictable way in these circumstances and it is 
possible to rely fairly confidently on reflex audience reaction. 


If there are a number of static objects on the screen with the attention equally 
divided between them and suddenly one of the objects moves, all eyes go to 
the moving object about {1/5} second later. Movement is, in effect, a signal 

to attract attention. If, therefore, a preliminary movement is made before the 
main movement, such as drawing back the foot before a kick, the attention of 
the audience can be attracted to the foot. This ensures that they will see the 
kick when it comes. 


The amount of anticipation used considerably affects the speed of the action 
that follows it. If the audience can be led to expect something to happen 
then the action, when it does take place, can be very fast indeed without 
them losing the thread of what is going on. If the audience is not prepared for 
something that happens very quickly, they may miss it. In this case the action 
has to be slower. 


In an extreme case, if the anticipation is properly done, the action itself needs 
only to be suggested for the audience to accept it. For instance, if a character 
is to zip off screen it is enough for him to draw back in preparation, followed 
by perhaps one or two drawings to start the forward movement. A few 
drybrush speed lines or a puff of dust can then imply that he has gone (see 
the Drybrush section on page 112 for a definition of the technique). These 
lines or dust should be made to disperse fairly slowly—probably in not less 
than 12 frames. 


Anticipation — 


YE 
WYO. AZ 
(ExT, Kix 
f Mo Vac D 
| =* / pe 
f C AN 
by PE i 


FIGU 
anin 
weig 
its ac 
sim 


he o 


0 the dog. As the dog accelerates 
away the ear trails behind. B When the 
dog stops, the ear tends to continue 
ards at the same speed before 
swinging to rest. C Cloth trails in a way 
hat combi 
and the air resistance. D A horse's tail. 

EA feather, which is more springy than 


RE 29 To maintain fluid 

ation it is essential to treat the 
of a body differently fro 
cessories or extremities. A A 
lified dog's ear and its attachment 


nes the effects of its weight 


her examples. 


Follow Through 


Follow Through 


The animation of an extremity, such as a coat-tail or a feather in the hat, is 
difficult to key at the same time as the character to which it belongs. Objects 
of this nature move to some extent independently of the character they 

are attached to. It is, therefore, difficult to predict where they will be a few 
frames ahead without following their movement drawing-by-drawing. The 
movement of an extremity depends on: 


1. The action of the character. 
2. The extremity’s own weight and degree of flexibility. 
3. Air resistance. 


Imagine a dog with floppy ears, which hang vertically when the dog is still. 
When the dog accelerates away the ears tend to stay behind but are pulled 
forward. As long as the dog does not slow down, the ears trail out behind, 
with a wave motion if the dog's head goes up and down. If the dog slows 
down and stops, the ears try to continue forward, and may stretch forwards 
before swinging backward again and finally coming to rest. An attempt to key 
this movement with the dog is almost certain to fail. For instance, the ear may 
be moving at its fastest as the dog is coming to rest. 


Similarly, a cloak of heavy cloth moves independently as a result of the 
movement of the character's shoulders. It is important for the fluidity of 

the animation that the cloak is allowed to continue with its own speed and 
direction when the shoulders change their speed and direction. As a cloak is a 
large area, air resistance may be important too, particularly if the cloth is light. 
The movement of a gauze veil, for example, is governed almost entirely by air 
resistance, trailing behind the character and drifting slowly to rest after the 
character does. 


59 


— Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 30 AA dog jumps in and 
stops. The front legs squash on 2 and 
the back legs on 4. The head and front 
legs are static on 5, although the back 
legs, tail and ears are still moving. 
B-F Five balls bouncing: B, Cand E are 
together; D is overlapped one frame 
late and F one frame early. 


60 


Overlapping Action 


Overlapping Action 


It is usually a good idea in animation to have a time lag between the 
movements of different parts of the figure. This is called ‘overlapping action’ 
In a slow, gentle action this may not be necessary, but in a more violent 
movement it helps to give fluidity. 


If several characters are dancing in unison on the screen, that is, using the 
same animation traced off several times, their movements look much more 
alive and fluid with an overlap of one or two frames on some of the characters. 
The result is that these characters are just out of sync with the others, which 
appears less mechanical than having them exactly in unison. Trained soldiers 
marching, when the effect should be rather machine-like, should of course 

be timed exactly together. For a squad of new recruits, however, a four frame 
overlap on some of them may not be enough to give a ragged look to their 
marching. 


Imagine a dog running along and coming to a stop. The first things to stop 

are probably his front feet, then his back legs and feet come up behind. As 

he has gone into a ‘squash’ onto the front feet at first, once all four feet are 

firmly on the ground he comes out of this and might even go up too highand _ GA loosely rattling car can be built 
settle back into the final pose. If he has floppy ears, these are probably the last —_up, for example, in four drawings. The 
things to come to rest. bonnet and the door can be keyed on 
the top scale, two wheels and one 
mudguard on the second scale, the 
steering wheel and the front bumper 
on the third scale, and so on. In this 
way the movement of each part of the 
car can be made to overlap with the 
part next to it as far as possible. The 
amount of movement depends on the 
circumstances. 


The principle on which overlapping action is based is really only that of 
momentum, inertia and action through a flexible joint as discussed on page 
38. The reason it works so well in animation is that the natural tendencies of 
movement work in this way, and these are picked up and exaggerated. 


61 


Timing for Animation 


Timing an Oscillating Movement 


A fast vibrating movement, such as a spring twanging can be done as shown 
in Fig. A. The movement between the extremes is so fast that no in-between 
drawings are necessary. It is only necessary to show the extreme positions 
of the spring getting gradually closer to the rest position. The vibration of a 
larger and heavier object, such as a springboard just after a diver has left it, 
is timed more slowly, taking perhaps four frames to go from the bottom of 
the movement to the top. In any action in which the direction of movement 
reverses at an extreme, it tends to come out of the extreme more slowly than 
going into it. This gives more ‘snap’ to the movement. Cycles of less than six 
frames may look mechanical and it may be worth doubling the length of the 
cycle with two different variations of the movement or, instead of using a 
repeat of four frames, use a double near-repeat of seven or nine frames, so 
that the same positions do not appear on two consecutive repeats. 


The other type of inanimate repeat is discussed on page 80, in which the 
force of the wind causes a wave to move along a flag. A similar movement 
takes place when an animal wags its tail. The tail-wagging muscles can be 
considered as acting directly on the part of the tail next to the animal's body 
causing the lower section of the tail to move from side to side. As the tail is 
flexible this movement is transmitted to the next, higher section with a slight 
time lag. The movement of this second section is then passed on with another 
time lag, and so on to the end. 


FIGURE 31 AA vibrating spring animated on single frames. B The slower vibration of a 
springboard. C A repeat cycle of an animal's tail wagging. D The quicker wag of a dog's tail, on 
double frames. E A surprised reaction, or ‘take’ can be achieved by inbetweening the character 
from 1 to 13 on odd numbers and from 2 to 13 on even numbers. If the drawings are shot 
consecutively a vibrating movement is achieved, coming to rest on 13. 


Timing an Oscillating Movement 


Timing for Animation 


Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—1 


Each part of the body moves as a result of the action of muscles, or as a result 
of the movement of another part of the body to which it is attached. For 
instance in Fig. A, when the arm is raised, the upper arm tends to be raised 
first by the shoulder muscles. As the elbow is a flexible joint, there is a time lag 
before the forearm starts to move and similarly another time lag before the 
hand moves. 


In a walk, the knee is a hinge joint and the ankle acts almost like a ball and 
socket joint. If the angle between the shin and the foot is kept the same, 

the ankle joint appears to be rigid, so this angle must vary. In Fig. B, the foot 
starts on the ground (position 1) and is lifted forward for the step. The knee 
is raised, but the foot tends to hang back, and so comes up heel first. The toe 
trails downwards until the top of the movement (position 4), but as the leg 
straightens the foot tends to keep going up and so, as the heel goes down, 
the foot rotates until the heel hits the ground (positions 5 and 6). The foot 
now tends to continue its downward movement, but as it is stopped by the 
ground it quickly slaps down flat. 


If, as in Fig. C, a character is to give a strong pull ona rope, the first part of the 
body to move is probably the hips, followed by the shoulders, the arms and 
finally by the rope. The amount of movement depends on the strength of the 
character, the weight on the other end of the rope and the mood of the scene, 
but the order in which different parts of the movement take place is the same. 


If, in the same situation, the character is being pulled by a force at the other 
end of the rope, as in Fig. D, then the order of events is reversed. First the rope 
moves, then the arm, the shoulders and the hips. The first part of the pull 


64 


Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—1 


takes up the slack in the rope and, if the movement is fast, the shoulders do 
not move until the rope and the arms have been pulled into a straight line. At 
this point the shoulders jerk forward and the character tends to pull out into a 
straight line as he goes out of screen. In a slow, steady pull the character may 
have time to react and try to resist. 


FIGURE 32 A Raising an arm—showing the effect of flexible joints. B In a walk, the flexible ankle joint results in the foot railing downwards as the 
ankle goes up on drawings 2 and 3, and trailing upwards as the ankle goes down on drawings 5 and 6. CThe sequence of events when a man pulls on 

a rope. On drawing 2 he takes up the slack, on 3 he starts to move his body weight backward, and on 4 he leans back on the rope. D When the rope itself 
is jerked, the man’s arms are drawn forwards until they are in a straight line with the rope. At this point his shoulders are pulled forward in drawing 3, and 
in 4 and 5 his whole body is dragged away. 


65 


Timing for Animation 


Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—2 


To give the impression that a character is wielding a heavy hammer it is 
important to time the movement carefully. 


The start position is as Fig. 1. The man is relaxed with the hammerhead resting 
on the peg that he is going to hit. To start the movement he lifts the hammer. 
If it is heavy, he cannot do this in the position shown in Fig. 1 A as he would 
then be off-balance and would topple over. In order to transfer the weight of 
the hammer over his feet so that he is balanced, he must step forward and 
grasp the hammer near its head (Fig. 2). He can now slide the hammer toward 


FIGURE 33 To make the hammer look 

heavy, the man must keep the weight of the 
hammerhead more or less balanced above his 
feet, until he hits the ground with it. Only a light 
hammer could be lifted, as in 1 A, without the 
man falling over. 


66 


Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—2 


himself and lift it above his widely spaced feet (Fig. 3). As the head of the 
hammer rises above shoulder level, he starts to move its weight backward in 
preparation for the forward action. However he cannot let it go too far behind 
him or he would overbalance backward (Fig. 4). So he starts to move his body 
weight forward, and this eventually starts the hammerhead moving forward 
(Fig. 5). He jerks his body forwards and downwards to give a forward impetus 
(Fig. 6) and the job is done. Now he need only step back and the hammer will 
fall and hit the peg. This position links up to Fig. 1 or at least Fig. 2. 


67 


68 


Timing for Animation 


Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—3 


In an energetic repeated movement, for example, a man hitting something 
with a pitchfork, the different parts of the figure move in a particular way to 
give the maximum feeling of effort. 


Drawing 1 shows the impact of the pitchfork with the ground. The end of the 
pitchfork remains in contact with the ground for drawings 2-4, whilst the 
body begins to move out of the extreme position in readiness for the next 
stroke. The shoulders arrive at their furthest backward position in drawing 7 


Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—3 


and begin to move forwards again in drawing 8, although the head of the 
pitchfork is still moving backward. In drawing 9, the hips move quickly 
backward as the shoulders and arms come forward and downwards, leaving 

a big gap between the position of the pitchfork in this drawing and that in 
drawing 1 to give a final impact to the movement. Note how the curvature of 
the body changes from convex to concave by means of ‘S’ curves on drawings 
2 and 7. 


FIGURE 34 The man is repeatedly hitting 
something on the ground with a pitchfork. Note 
how the weight of the body is maneuvred to get 


the maximum effort into the impact on drawing 1. 


69 


SS Timing for Animation 


% q 21 23 p® 
4 
Y WS 


ane! 
{RSS 
OT 


FIGURE 35 On drawing 17 the Roman athlete confidently prepares to lift the heavy barbell. He anticipates on drawing 31 and tries to lift on drawing 37. 
The weight does not move so he makes a much bigger anticipation on drawing 51 and a big jerk on drawing 57, which enables him to get the weight up in 


the air on drawing 65, before collapsing with exhaustion. 


70 


Timing to Suggest Weight and Force—4 


An athlete is going to lift the heavy barbell. He starts confidently, and in 
drawing 17 is anticipating grabbing the bar. He grabs the bar on 25, and 31 

is the anticipation to the first attempted lift. He is still confident but grits his 
teeth somewhat as he makes the effort, as shown in drawing 37. The bar bell 
does not move. After 37 he comes to a puzzled hold as he realizes he has a 
more difficult problem than he thought. In drawing 57, he makes a much 
bigger jerk after making a more determined and annoyed anticipation in 
drawing 51. After this jerk, he manages to lift the barbell with great difficulty. 
A few frames after drawing 65, he collapses out of screen under the weight. 


Scene from /diots & Angels, by Bill Plympton. 


71 


FIGURE 36 Ina repeated move 


suc 


forward and backward between 


la 


of effort, intermediate 


d 9. However, to give a feeli 


9—are also needed. Of these 5 


mo 


body comes forward before the fi 


th 


e important, as the weight o 


as sawing, the action is basi 


keys—5 an 
is 


st is given to the right arm. 


Timing to Suggest Force: Repeat Action 


Timing to Suggest Force: Repeat Action 


In a repetitive to and fro action such as sawing, it is not sufficient to draw 

the forward and backward extremes and then inbetween them. To convey 
the feeling of effort being put into the action, it is necessary to analyze 

the relationship in time between the movement of the body weight, the 
muscles of the arm, and the action of the saw. This can be done by actual 

or mental miming. If a lot of effort is needed to push the saw through the 
wood, this cannot be supplied by the arm muscles alone, as straightening and 
bending the arm would move the shoulder back and forth as well as the saw. 
Immediately before straightening the arm, the whole body weight must be 
moved forward, so that when the arm does straighten it does so against the 
forward momentum of the body weight, and so the thrust is applied to the 
saw. The thrust is increased by rotating the shoulders at the same time. 


When sawing with the right hand the right shoulder is held back during the 
beginning of the forward body movement, then it is quickly brought forward, 
followed immediately by the straightening of the right arm, which puts the 
full effort of the movement into the action of the saw. On the return stroke, 
little effort is required in the movement of the saw, which cuts only on the 
forward stroke, and so the sequence of events is less complicated. Some time 
lag between the backward movement of the body and the saw makes the 
animation more fluid, but otherwise straightforward in-between drawings are 
sufficient. 


73 


SS Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 37 A Note that the action 


of surprise from drawi 


gs 1 to 13 


is strengthened by a preparatory 


gesture in drawing 5 
on drawing 9. B Simi 


and an overshoot 
arly this 


character's expression is underlined 


by key drawing 3 tha 
dramatically the surp 
key drawing 7 which 


drives home 
rise expressed in 
would hold for 


ao 


p 
series by Halas and B 


thaps 12 frames. (F 


om Hamilton, TV 
atchelor.) 


Character Reactions and ‘Takes’ 


Character Reactions and ‘Takes’ 


A further advantage which animation can claim over live action is the ease 
with which character reactions can be controlled and exaggerated. Without 
some degree of exaggeration, cartoon animation would not look right. The 
success of such effects lies in timing. 


A character makes a ‘take’ when he suddenly sees or becomes aware of 
something that makes him react in surprise. There may be a short or long time 
lag between when the character sees whatever it is, and when the message 
gets through to his brain. This would be at least five frames, but could be a lot 
longer depending on the character's mental ability. 


The first principle is to coordinate the character's body movement with his 
facial expression. The legs, arms, hands, the position of the body—all must 
contribute to a reaction. The facial expression must be emphasized with 
adequate exaggeration, particularly of the eyes and mouth. 


In Figs A and B, both characters start with a hold on drawing 1, whilst the 
message is transmitted to the brain, then both go down to an anticipation or 
‘squash’ position. They are then both animated up to a position beyond that in 
which they eventually come to rest. This ‘overshoot’ (Fig. A9 and Fig. B5) 

is the drawing that gives the feeling of surprise in each case, but the hold 

at the end (Fig. A13 and Fig. B7) is the drawing that the audience sees. The 
latter is, therefore, the one in which the face should project the character's full 
reaction. 


There are, of course, differences in reaction according to the type of character 
portrayed. A big brainless character requires a longer time to react than a 
small excitable character. This is where character animation can excel on its 
own, and where the art of animation begins. 


75 


Timing for Animation 


76 


Timing to Give a Feeling of Size 


The way a movement is timed can contribute greatly to the feeling of size 
and scale of an object or character. When animating a man with naturalistic 
proportions, his movements may be timed as he would perform them in real 
life. If, however, he is to appear as a large giant, his actions must be retimed. 
As a giant he has much more weight, more mass, more momentum, more 
inertia; he moves more slowly than a normal man. He takes more time to 
get started and once moving takes more time to stop. In fact any changes of 
movement take place more slowly. 


Conversely, a tiny character, such as Tom Thumb, has less momentum, less 
inertia than normal and so his movements tend to be quicker. 


The animated films of legendary Japanese director Hayao Miyazaki show 
particular skill in illustrating, in both layout and movement, the relationship 
between large objects and smaller figures. In his 1984 film Nausicad of the 
Valley of Wind (Kaze no Tani no Naushika), fantastically huge flying aircraft 


FIGURE 38 A and B The timing of the 
movements of the giant (A) would 

be very much slower than that of the 
mice (B). To make the giant appear 
large and heavy, we must allow plenty 
of time for him to get his weight 
moving. On the contrary, the mice 

are tiny and light so their movements 
would be quick and snappy. 


come down into a valley, with people and smaller craft scampering around 
them. The timing of the airplanes reflects their immense size, while the tiny 
humans move faster. 


In nature it is possible to gauge roughly the scale of an object as it falls. For 
instance, if a model car is filmed going over a cliff edge and it hits the ground 
half a second later, it is immediately obvious that this is a model car and the 
cliff is about 1.2 meters high. If the same action is filmed with a high-speed 
camera and projected at normal speed, the car takes about four seconds to 
reach the bottom of the cliff. If there is nothing else to judge the scale by, the 
brain is then deluded into thinking that it is a full sized car, and that the cliff is 
about 80 meters high. 


The action of flames is similarly affected by the scale of the fire. A small flame 
flickers quite quickly, whereas the flames of a large fire have a slower, 
wave-like movement (see page 45). 


An image from the Japanese animated motion picture entitled Kaze no Tani no Naushika (Nausicaa 
of the Valley of the Wind). (© 1984 Nibariki — Gh) 


77 


So Timing for Animation 


Zk 


FIGURE 40 A 
to apply asm 
to slow himse 


5 he leans ba 


(= ee 
7 
o 
=) 
So 


skid. The car a 
continue forw 


y the friction 


, etc, bec 
esistance Ca 
witch, i.e. the 
ackward. He 


surface. He keeps 


e gro 
stortion caused b 


ch fi 


ckwa 


dt 
ards, 


e wheel hub are 


of t 


spinning car whee' 


ause 
ses t 
hat, 


e elephant is trying 


own ona slippery 


long hai 


iction as possible 


is weight low down 
rd and digs his front 
d. BA possible 
y an extreme tire 
e axle tend to 


whilst the tire and 
ressed backward 
e ground. CA 
throws up dirt, 
of friction. D Air 
e extremities of the 
eet, etc., to bend 
and clothes 


ow in the wi 


see page 81). 


din 


a series of waves 


The Effects of Friction, Air Resistance and Wind 


The Effects of Friction, Air Resistance 
and Wind 


Imagine a cartoon elephant running along. He wants to make a sudden stop. 
How should he be animated? If he is on an ice rink, it is difficult to see how 
he can stop. It might be possible to turn him round and make him work his 
legs as though running in the opposite direction. On ice, he would get little 
purchase and so this method would produce little result. If he is on a normal 
surface he can use the friction between the ground and his feet to slow 
himself down. The animator must, however, arrange the elephant’s weight 
to be as far as possible behind his feet as he slows down. If he was upright, 
the friction would slow down his feet, but the upper part of his body would 
continue moving quickly and he would fall forwards. So his body must lean 
backward. He might go into this position with a slight jump to achieve the 
maximum effect of his weight bearing down onto his feet. With his back 
foot covering the maximum area of ground for friction and his front heel 
ploughing into the ground for maximum braking effect, he can stop quickly. 
As he stops he must bring his body upright to avoid falling backward. 


Similarly, if a man applies the brakes suddenly in a motor car it may be 
effective to draw the car in a backward-leaning position, with the tires 
squashed so that they have as large an area as possible in contact with the 
road. If the hubs press forward against the tyres whilst the friction from the 
road surface stretches them backward and the driver leans back pulling on 
the brake lever, a good effect should result. 


Wind is a useful device to give life to an animated object. It can very 
occasionally be animated as drybrush but is usually shown by its effects. 
Leaves are swept along, trees bend and wave according to the wind speed, 
and so on. Moving air flows and eddies around objects in much the same way 
as water does. Light objects, such as dead leaves, are swept along more or less 
at wind speed in curves and eddies. 


There is usually an area of calm air in the lee of a solid object in which 
windswept material collects. Driving snow does not make a drift until the 
wind meets an object such as a wall. The snow is then deposited against the 
wall. 


Anything fairly flexible, such as a plant or a tree, has its own natural vibration 
period, depending on its length, like an inverted pendulum. When blown by 
gusty wind, such an object tends to sway in this natural rhythm. A tall tree 
might sway to and fro in two or three seconds and a plant in less than one 
second. 


The speed and mood of the wind is also well shown by curtains, waving 
flags and clothing, the animation of which can be graduated from a slow, 
languorous wave to a violent, rapid flutter as the cloth strains to tear itself 
from its support. 


79 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 41 A Plan view of e 


ormed as wi 
eddy is a cyli 
gles to the 


g betwee 


iv) 


rest marked 


a 


epeating a 


der roughly at r 
aper. B Wave s 
eft and right e 
imation cycle. 
X follows itself 


gad infini 


oe 


80 


m. 


nd passes the po! 


Timing Cycles—How Long a Repeat? 


The old saying has been that when an audience is aware of a cycle, the cycle 
is a failure. If the animator uses cycles in a clever way and disguises them 
well, the audience will never be aware they are watching repeated actions. 
A naturally repetitive movement, like that of a piston, or a run, can have 
quite a short cycle. A run might take eight or 10 frames for two paces and 
would probably need one drawing per frame. A cycle of two people dancing 
together could be 16 frames or more, but could repeat many times without 
seeming repetitive. 


Other actions, such as a fire burning, which are not repetitive by nature, 
require extra cycles of approximately one second or more. The number of 
extra cycles required to add variation to the movement depends upon the 


number of times it is to be repeated. 


dies 

e. Each 
ight 
hape of 
dies. 

he wave 
ong the 


i” 


~~” 


—_—_—_——fne- 


iS 


Timing Cycles—How Long a Repeat? 


Another example that would need a repeat of a second or more is smoke. 
This can be arranged so that the repeats on the drawings become closer and 
closer together at the top, so that the speed diminishes as the smoke breaks 
up and disappears. 


If a snow cycle is either to be run for a long time or to be used in several 
scenes, it needs a cycle of several seconds so that the repeats are not 
apparent. If it is animated on several levels (foreground, middle distance 
and distant) and the three cycles are made of different lengths, they repeat 
differently each time round and give the effect of a very long cycle. 


A Waving Flag 


The movement of a flag in the wind is an example of a wave movement, 
which is used very often in animation. 


Seen in a simplified form (Fig. A), a steady wind is split into eddies on alternate 
sides of the flagpole, looking much like the wake of a ship in water. Each of 
these eddies is roughly a cylinder, more or less at right angles to the paper. 

A flag attached to the pole is blown to the right and assumes a wave shape, 
sandwiched between the alternate eddies (Fig. B). The cloth of the flag makes 
the movement of the wind visible. As the eddies follow one another to the 
right, so the waves in the cloth follow one another along the flag. 


Fig. C shows a simplified repeat cycle of this. The wave crest marked X travels 
along the top of the flag to the right, followed by a trough caused by the 
alternate eddy. This is followed by another crest similar to X which can be 
animated into X again to complete the cycle. 


Note that in this kind of movement there is no actual ‘key’ drawing. All the 
drawings are of equal importance in the series and each one must flow 
smoothly to the next. 


Depending on the length of the scene it is advisable to draw one or two 
variations that can be introduced to give more interest to the repeat. 


x x ay) 


81 


Timing for Animation 


Multiple Character Scenes 


At times you may be asked to animate a scene in which two or more figures 
are moving in the same shot. You have to plan the motion so as not to cloud 
the scene's intent with a lot of extraneous movement. Motions occurring 

at opposite sides of the screen at random could divide and distract your 
audience's attention. Just like a dance choreographer is always aware of which 
dancer the audience should focus on, so should the animator be aware of the 
primary character in a scene. The supporting characters have to move little 
enough to be alive, reacting to the primary character's actions, but not move 
so as to be distracting. Characters in the far background could move very little 
or hold, since the audience will sense them only peripherally. This process has 
become more difficult in digital animation since the director may change his 
or her mind as to where the camera is, thus negating your graphic strategy. 


Digital Crowd Scenes 


Modern 3D programs like Massive have given us the ability to move large 
numbers of characters in a relatively easy way. The pre-programmed behavior 
of characters can be multiplied endless times and placed either close up or 
far in the distance. Like a choreographer, the animator has to be as much 

in control of the overall sweep of the action as in the minute poses of the 
individual figures. For instance, a swarm of cavalry led by a war chief waving 
his sword rides up from the distance, and sweeps around behind a line of 
enemy war elephants. The animator may create four or more individual cycle 
actions and place them at differing speeds, to create enough variance in 

the motion to make the actions seem random. If the actions of two or more 
figures set too close together move in unison, like synchronized swimmers, 
the natural effect will be lost. 


82 


Newer versions of the software allow for more complex crowd behavior: 
figures avoiding the elephants, swinging a sword once close enough to the 
enemy, running away if outmatched, etc. Figures up close to the foreground 
should be animated as a customized performance, as the audiences will be 
more aware of their actions than the figures far in the back. The artist should 
just take care not to become too complacent and think the software will do 
all the work for them. You must think of adding one or more figures doing 

a singularly customized action, and place them in an area where they will 
be seen. This will complete the illusion of randomness. Special effects like 
occasional arrows flying through the scene, smoke and dust can be layered 
over to further mask the repetition of the characters cycles. The Walt Disney 
classic 107 Dalmatians (1961) was full of cycles and reused movement. Yet 
because these are so skillfully hidden, the audience is unaware of these tricks. 


A scene of Massive avatars, courtesy of Rhythm & Hues Studios. 


83 


Timing for Animation 


Effects Animation: Flames and Smoke 


The movement of flames is governed by the movements of air currents above 
the fire. The hottest part of a fire is in the center and above this the hot air 
rises. As it rises it is replaced by colder air rushing inwards from the sides. This 
air in its turn is heated and rises, and so the process is continuous. This flow 
of air usually gives a roughly conical shape to the flames, with a succession 

of indentations representing eddies of cold air, starting at the base of the fire 
and moving inwards and upwards. 


The timing of these movements is fastest at the base, where the fire is hottest, 
slowing down on the way up. As the individual flames taper off, break up 

into smaller pieces and disappear, so the speed should diminish also. The 
shapes must be kept fluid and ever-changing, although they should still be 
identifiable as smoothly rising areas of flame. If areas of flame stick in one 
place or even appear to animate downwards, this ruins the effect. 


The timing of the flames also depends on the size of the fire. A big fire is 
hotter than a small one and, therefore, much bigger volumes of air are 
involved. Obviously, in a big fire an individual flame takes longer to work its 
way from the base of the fire to the top, probably several seconds, whilst in a 
small fire it might only take a few frames. 


Flames are volumes of gas which can ignite or die out quite suddenly, and can 
therefore change their volume quickly from one drawing to the next—against 
the normal rule in animation that volumes should stay the same. Surges of 
flame usually appear quickly and die away more slowly. 


Smoke can be treated in many ways but the main timing problem is how to 
plan a repeat which does not appear too mechanical. 


One way of doing this is illustrated on page 85. A variation on this basic idea is 
to animate puffs arranged on a wave pattern. These may remain as individual 
puffs or merge into one another to form an irregular column. A cycle of this 
type of smoke would take 32 frames or more. 


84 


Effects Animation: Flames and Smoke 


A succession of quick puffs, as from a car exhaust, if repeated, may need two 
or more different shapes of puff, or perhaps alternating puffs and smoke rings, 
as the same puff repeated looks mechanical. 


A really big column of smoke rising from a fire forms a mushroom or smoke 
ring—a doughnut-shaped eddy with a hole in the middle. 


FIGURE 43 A Cold air is drawn in at the base of a fire and rises as it is warmed. B A fire cycle: 1-8. The eddies marked X follow one another upwards, 
slowing down as they rise. C and D Alternative smoke cycles. Points Y animate upwards to Y, and points Z to Z. E Car exhaust cycle. F Billowing 
smoke—showing introduction of new arcs. 


85 


Timing for Animation 


Water 


Water moves in a very characteristic way as it has no mechanical strength and 
is held together only weakly. 


In a water splash, each little drop making up the mass of water at the start 
proceeds on its own trajectory, or parabola, regardless of what happens to 
any other part of the splash. In a splash, the water radiates from a central 
point. It starts as a mass of water, which spreads out into irregular sheets, held 
loosely together by surface tension. As it spreads out even further, the surface 
tension breaks down and the sheets disintegrate quite suddenly into drops 
that continue outwards individually. 


Take, for example, a heavy stone dropped into a lake. As the stone enters, 

FIGURE 44. Each part of the water in some water is dispersed by it and this radiates upwards and outwards to form 
a splash proceeds on its own parabola, © the splash. As the stone goes deeper it momentarily leaves a space behind it. 
regardless of what happens tothe rest ~~ ‘This is rapidly filled by water coming in from all sides and as it meets in the 
he splash. As the water radiates middle the force causes a jet of water to erupt vertically in the middle of the 
wards it spreads into sheets, as in splash. This usually splits into drops before falling back. So a splash of this kind 

into individual must be timed as two separate events. 
ops, as in 9. Itis not necessary to 


and 8; then splits up i 


oso 2 SH So Ss 


=) 


imate out every drop individually— 


ey can be left off a few at a time, 


ovided the downward movement is 
intained. 


=) iS 


86 


A large body falling into a tub would give a rather different effect. There is 
only a limited amount of water, and the body would force most of it out 
between itself and the sides of the tub. This would be similar to the first splash 
above, but there would be no secondary vertical jet. 


Water under pressure can exert a considerable force. If a jet is directed 
upwards at an angle it describes a parabola, as each individual drop behaves 
like a ball thrown through the air (see page 32). If a jet of water hits a flat 
surface, the water is reflected back like light in a mirror, although with a good 
deal of random movement as well. 


Water thrown from a bucket behaves like a splash. The water leaves the 
bucket as an irregularly shaped lump, which becomes streamlined in the 
direction of movement. Then individual parts of the water travel on their own 
parabolas, which diverge so that the water is stretched and then breaks into 
drops as before. 


Drops can be made to animate smoothly by streamlining them into long 

narrow shapes and moving them along parabolas with a slight overlap in length 
between one drawing and the next. It is not necessary to follow each drop to its 
logical conclusion by animating it off screen or hitting the ground and splitting 
into smaller drops again. It is usually enough to slow down and diminish the 
sizes of the drops around the edge of a splash, eventually losing them altogether. 
This is effective as long as a lot of drops do not disappear on the same drawing 
but are allowed to vanish in a random way over a number of frames. 


87 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 45 A Each drop of water 

in a hosepipe jet travels on its own 
parabola. Partial gaps in the jet help to 
avoid strobing in animation. B Semi- 
diagrammatic illustration of a jet from 
a moving nozzle. 


Effects around objects partially immersed in water are usually shown as 
ripples, which radiate from around the object and gradually split up and 
disappear. If the object is not moving or if it is moving in a cyclical way, then 
the effects can be made into a cycle. But if the object itself is animating, the 
effects must be animated continuously, which can mean a great deal of work. 


A lot of work is involved in animating the disappearance of water spilt on 
the ground. This movement requires several seconds and is generally done 
by producing a series of holes in the water, increasing them in size until they 
coalesce and finally the water disappears. As far as possible such a situation 
should be avoided. 


88 


To achieve realistic liquidity, the timing for animation of water is quite critical. 
If timed too slowly it looks oily or even treacly (like syrup), whilst if timed too 
quickly it may fizz in a non-liquid-like way. 


C Ripples from a partially submerged object are usually animated as concentric ellipses moving outwards and gradually disappearing. D Part of a cycle of 
the reflection of a bright light in almost still water. 


89 


Timing for Animation 


Rain 

One problem with animating rain is that it can appear very mechanical. Some 
animators avoided the problem altogether by using live action footage of rain, 
shot against a black background and double exposed over the cartoon. But the 
aesthetic of animating rain is more desirable and gives the artist more control. 
Although rain actually falls in more or less parallel lines, it must be animated 


FIGURE 46 A Tracks for foreground 
rain cycle. B Tracks for more distant 
rain. C Cycle of raindrops hitting the 
ground. D Shaking a wet brush: 1 and 
2, the brush moves to the right; 3 and 
4, the brush moves to the left and 
water continues to the right. E Tracks 


for a foreground snow cycle. F Tracks 


for a middle distance snow cycle. A 
di 
this on long shots, etc. 


stant level would be needed below 


90 


with a more random slope if a realistic effect is to be achieved. It is best to time it 
moving quickly down. If it is drawn on more than one level, the distant rain should 
move more slowly, to give depth. Foreground rain should cross the screen in 
about six frames whilst more distant rain should move progressively slower. 


Individual drops are drawn as straight lines with consecutive drawings 
overlapping each other slightly. Rain almost certainly needs single frame 
animation for a realistic effect. It also needs a fairly long repeat if it is not to 
appear too mechanical—24 frames at least. 


For really heavy rain, the effect is enhanced by animating a cycle of drops 
hitting the ground. These can be quite random and unrelated to the falling 
rain. Each drop should animate out in about six frames. 


As with all effects animation, rain can express a mood by its timing. For a 
miserable mood, rain can fall vertically at perhaps half its normal speed, whilst the 
speed can increase with a greater tilt from the horizontal for more violent moods. 


A really stormy effect would need to show random gusts of wind and would 
be very difficult and time-consuming to animate. 


Water Drops 


When shaking water drops from a brush, for example, the drops should start 
one drawing later than the extreme of the brush, traveling in a continuation 
of the direction of the brush before the flick. In other words, before the flick 

the brush and water are traveling together, after the flick the brush changes 
direction, but the water keeps going. 


Snow 


Gently falling snow drifts in wavy lines and needs even longer cycles than 

rain to avoid the audience noticing the same flake following itself down the 
same track. Two seconds may be too short if the repeat is run more than a few 
times. A foreground flake may take about two seconds to cross the screen, but 
of course may take less. 


To give depth to the snowfall, at least three different sizes of flake are usually 
needed; the smaller more distant ones traveling more slowly than those in the 
foreground. Distant snow is not generally animated out of the bottom of the 
screen but fizzles out in a random way somewhere on the screen. The exact 
point where it disappears depends on the background on which it is used. 


Snow is usually produced by the animator providing a drawing of the wavy 
tracks of the snow, with graduations marked on them and numbered so that 
the snow can be traced directly onto cel, usually with a drybrush. Blizzards 
present a similar problem to rainstorms—the tracks become more horizontal 
as the wind speed increases—and a real storm effect calls for eddies and 
surges in the movement. 


91 


FIGURE 47 A 


icipation fol 


ack-and-whi 


e dust wo 
A specimen 
iating lines, 


asize an i 


‘splat: C Dus 


owed by m 


sts, which could be alter 


ld slowly d 


etc. can be 


npact. 


—14: a possi 
osion. Drawing 2 is aq 


e frames. Aft 


ble 

ck 

Itiple 
nated with 
er drawing 
sperse, 


_ stars, 
sed to 


Explosions 


Explosions 


As explosions are intended to shock the audience, it is not advisable to use a 
predictable formula for them. There are many different ways of creating the 
effect of an explosion, but there is some similarity in the timing in each case. 
There should be a quick anticipation of some sort, then a quick burst or series 
of bursts, which should be kept going for some frames, followed by a slower 
dispersal. 


Explosions, therefore, start with a very fast movement and taper off to a slow 
finish. As the initial burst is so quick, a short anticipation, which attracts the 
eye to the point of explosion just before it happens, increases the effect. Four 
or five frames should be enough for this. 


Once the explosion starts it should fill the screen in perhaps three frames, 
followed by a flicker effect for about six frames and then a slow clearance of 
smoke lasting several seconds. 


A small bang, such as a pistol shot, can finish in perhaps five frames, but a 
larger explosion needs extending in time to be effective. A really impressive 
explosion, such as a long shot of a building blowing up, probably needs the 
burst itself to last for a second or more, perhaps by arranging a succession 
of secondary explosions within the main one. This also would require a slow 
aftermath with perhaps a column of smoke rising, and so on. 


Smaller effects, which work on similar lines to explosions, are called ‘splats. 
These animate out in about five frames from the point of contact of a blow to 
emphasize the impact. They are usually painted white. To emphasize a lesser 
impact, one can animate out short radiating lines for about the same number 
of frames. Door slams can be emphasized either with a splat or with a number 
of radiating puffs of dust from the edges of the door. These also should 
disappear in about five frames. 


93 


Timing for Animation 


Digital Effects 


The creation of animated effects by computer has become a widely used 

tool in many major live action movies as well as cartoon films. Effects that 
were difficult or time-consuming to draw traditionally, like cast shadows or 
registering animated characters to live action backgrounds, are now done 
painlessly on the computer. During the early development of digital effects 
animation, the emphasis was on making the effects look as realistic as 
possible. Technicians made great strides in writing the mathematical formulas 
(algorithms), manipulating patterns of particles and fractals (a fragmented 
geometric shape that can be subdivided into parts, each part a reduced copy 
of the whole) to achieve natural-looking fire, smoke and water. Many good 
effects programs are available today commercially. These are called ‘off-the- 
shelf software, as opposed to a studio developing proprietary programs for 
their specific needs. 


The animator must set the direction and the duration of the effect, introduce 
gravity and account for solid objects in the path of the effects. You also set 

the control for speed of the effect, size and turbulence. In digital effects the 
animator is not only thinking of movement, but now is concerned with the 
color, composition and the light integration. It is a process of playback and 
continual adjusting, using various controls on your computer screen. Despite 
the hyperbole of software salesmen and industry journalists, it is still a process 
that is formed frame-by-frame. 


A great problem before 2001 was doing bottom-light effects digitally, i.e. 
the glow of a fire, a lightning bolt, or a laser beam. Motion picture film was 
a chemical emulsion coated on celluloid strips, so controlled overexposure 
in the camera burned the emulsion. That gave the fire its recognizable glow. 
Because you can’t overexpose in a computer, a lot of thinking had to go into 
recreating that same diffusion of light. Today, known as ‘glare effects, they 
have become the responsibility mainly of the compositor, although some 
effects animators do compositing themselves. 


The Aesthetic in Effects Animation 


Many veteran effects animators complain that the copying of natural effects 
is not the end-all in effects in animation. There is an aesthetic to drawn effects 
that must be taken into account. 


What if your fire is highly stylized like the Japanese prints of Hokusai? In Nina 
Paley’s 2008 film Sita Sings the Blues, she styled her fire after Indian classical 
painting. Beyond the basic design style to the effects, you must also take into 
account the temper of the movement. Effects can have emotions, too. What 
if you want the fire to be angry? Or you want happy, lapping waters? Perhaps 
the director wants the lightning bolts to have more branches and linger on 
screen longer? These are supra-natural concepts that need to be manipulated 
by the artistic taste of the effects animator. 


94 


Digital Effects 


Just as computerized music went from adaptations of traditional music to 
sounds only made possible in the computer, so animated effects are leaving 
their insistence on photo-realism and going as abstract as the imagination 
dares to go. 


For example, in the classic Japanese film Spirited Away by Hayao Miyazaki, 
there is the scene where the little girl is reaching into a rushing deluge of 
water to untangle the mud monster. While she is speaking dialog with her 
face close to the torrent, the animator deliberately chose to underplay the 
water spraying around her head so that the audience could see her expression 
clearly, i.e. her eyes wide open. In reality, the force of that torrent would spray 
so fiercely in her face that she could never have been able to speak clearly, 
much less keep her eyes open. Yet, we as an audience do not question the 
reality of the scene. 


Ly @ 


FIGURE 48 Different types of designs for fire effects. 


95 


a 


© 


& 


) 


© 


“aut 
ayat exer 


o 


FIGURE 49 AA straigh 
cycle, in which the sam 


tforward swing 
e drawings can 


be used for both directions of swing. 


B Flexible objects tend 


to swing more 


like this. C, D and E Short repeat 


cycles in which the san 
cannot be used in bot! 


e inbetweens 
directions of 


movement. F An eye b 


ink. 


Repeat Movements of Inanimate Objects 


Repeat Movements of Inanimate Objects 


In straightforward to-and-fro movements, such as those of a piston or 
pendulum, it may or may not be possible to use the same drawings in the 
reverse order for the return movement. With a rigid pendulum (Fig. A) it would 
be possible, but with a cartoon piston (Fig. D) animated with steam pressure 
in mind, the drawings used for the forward movement would not work in 
reverse. 


In any flexible movement, or that of any object which has something trailing, 
then a fresh set of inbetweens must be done for the two directions of 
movement (Figs B, C and E). 


In a to-and-fro movement in which the same drawings can be used in 
reverse, an optical problem arises at the ends of the movements. Suppose the 
animation is done on double frames and charted: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 

2, 3..., etc. it will be seen that drawings 5 and 2 occur twice, that is, they are 

on the screen for four frames out of six and so make a greater impact on the 
eye than the actual extremes, which in this case are 1 and 6. This effect can be 
avoided either by holding drawings 1 and 6 for four frames each, or else 

by missing out one of the exposures on 5 and 2, thus: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 5, 4, 3, 

1, 2, 3... etc. 


A similar optical effect can occur with eye blinks if the same inbetweens are 
used on the way down as on the way up, especially in close ups. In this case 
it is better to space the two sets of inbetweens differently so that the same 
positions do not occur on both the opening and shutting movements. 


97 


Timing for Animation 


Timing a Walk 


What are the main features of a ‘normal’ human walk? There can be as many 
walks as there are people. Does the character walk leaning forward or laid- 
back? With slumped shoulders or a posture that is ramrod erect? Does the 
character walk on tiptoes or on the balls of their feet or heels? Nose in the air 
or head down, deep in thought? What are the arms doing? 


The walk is the first step to finding the key to a character's personality. 


To begin, walking has been described by the old animators as ‘controlled 
falling; i.e. skilled manipulation of balance and weight. Most animators begin 
by animating their own walk, since it's motion is already within their minds. 


The only point in a walk when the figure is in balance is at the instant when 
the heel of the front foot touches the ground; the body weight here is evenly 
spaced between the two feet. This is usually the main key drawing (Fig. A). It 
gives the stride length, and so can be used for planning the number of steps 
needed for the character to cover a certain distance. This ‘step’ position is the 
one with the maximum forward and backward swing of the arms. It is actually 
the middle of the fall forward onto the front foot, when the front knee bends 
to cushion the downward movement of the weight. The key position here is 
usually known as the ‘squash’ position (Fig. A5). The body's center of gravity is 
at its lowest point, and the front leg supports the body weight. The back foot 
is almost vertical and although the toe is just touching the ground, it bears 
no weight at all in this position. In Fig. A9 the bent leg straightens, lifting the 
center of gravity to its highest point as the back foot moves forward. This is 
the’up’ position and leads into the next ‘step’ at 13. 


There are two slightly different ways of animating a walk—the choice is one 
of convenience. Suppose a character makes a 1.8 inch stride in 12 frames. 
Assuming that the walk is a repeat movement, then if we call the left ‘step’ 
drawing 1, this drawing will appear again 24 frames later (i.e. drawing 

25 = drawing 1) 3.6 inches left or right of the original position (Fig. B). 


98 


Timing a Walk 


So the intermediate positions of the walk can be animated between these two 
positions. The character can then advance along the cels, relative to the pegs, 
until it arrives back at drawing 1 at which point the pegs are moved 3.6 inches 
and carry on for the next two steps. 


The alternative method (Fig. C) is to animate from drawing 1 back to drawing 

1 in the same position, so that all the bodies in the cycle are superimposed 
over one another, with an up-and-down movement only, instead of advancing 
along the cels. The 3.6 inches, which the figure moves along every two paces, 
is now taken up by moving the foot backward 0.15 inch per frame. After 24 
frames the feet have effectively slid back the 3.6 inches to make up the two 
steps. This is called ‘animating on the spot’ because to make a man walk by 
this method, the pegs carrying the figure remain static while the background 
pans backward by the same amount as the feet per frame. 


A 


— a 
a a 


a 
a 


FIGURE 50 A Part of a walk cycle, spread out for clarity. The complete cycle would be 1-23 (i.e. 1 = 25), 17 being the same as 5 with legs reversed, and 
21 the same as 9. B The same cycle animated forward with static pegs. The pegs stay in position X whilst the figure moves forward on 1-23. The pegs then 
move to the right by the length of two strides and 1-23 is repeated in the new position Y. C A walk cycle‘on the spot! The body moves up and down whilst 
the heels slide backward along the scales at the same speed as the background pan. D Successive positions in a naturalistic walk. The left shoe is shaded 
black. Note that on 11 the left leg is straight just before making contact with the ground on 13 (see next page). 


99 


sa) Timing for Animation 


Types of Walk 


The up-and-down movement of the body should slow in and out of the key 
positions, but the forward movement of the body should be at a uniform 
speed, or the animation ‘sticks’ 


It is important that there is just enough time for the straight leg to register on 
the screen in the ‘step’ position. As the front leg is bent both before and after 
this position, there is a danger that the eye will connect these two positions— 
missing the straight leg—with the effect that the character is doing a‘bent- 
leg’ walk. Fig. D on the previous page gives another variation of this problem. 
It is based on a naturalistic walk, and the left leg kicks out straight on drawing 
11, although it is still moving forward to the’step’ position 13. The front foot 
should slap down flat on to the ground quickly after the ‘step’ drawing. This 
loosens the ankle joint. 


There are many variations on this walk. For example, in an aggressive walk the 
body leans forward, the chin is out, and the fists are clenched. In a proud or 
pompous walk the body may lean slightly backward, with the chest out and 
plenty of shoulder action, with the highest position on the ‘step’ drawing. Ina 
tired walk the body and head droop, arms may hang loosely and the feet may 
drag along the ground, and so on. A double bounce walk can give a character 
the sense of youthful energy, a‘street-sense’ feel, like a tough gang member. 
To achieve this, on each straight up pose add two additional frames of the 
character's foot rising up on its toe, almost a small hop. This bouncing gait 
creates a natural swagger for the character that shows ‘attitude’ 


Types of Walk 


FIGURE 51 Three different styles of 
walk: Top One step (12 frames) of a 
24 frame cycle. Middle Key positions 
from a 48 frame walk throug 
deep snow. On double frames two 
inbetweens are needed between each 
pair of keys. Bottom One stride of a 
24 frame cycle on double frames. The 
two’step’ positions are drawings 1 and 


13. The weight of the body squashes 


onto the front foot on 5 and rises as the 
back foot comes forward on 9. Note 
how the front leg remains straight on 3 
to avoid the ‘bent leg’ look. 


101 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 52 A Side view of imaginary <—X 
grid constructed around successive step’ 

positions of a walk cycle. B A similar grid 

to A, drawn in perspective. 


102 


Spacing of Drawings in Perspective 
Animation 


To animate in true perspective requires complex draughtsmanship and some 
understanding of the geometrical treatment of the subject. 


Especially when a character walks in perspective, an accurate perspective grid 
must be drawn giving the height of the character and the length of the strides, 
so that the animator has a clear idea of how the spacing of the strides gradually 
increases or decreases. It is quite a difficult animation problem to make all parts 
of a figure get larger or smaller and yet remain in the right proportions. 


For dramatic effect when a character rushes toward or away from the camera, 
a low horizon is preferable. High horizons provide a more relaxed effect. In 
both instances the vanishing point must be established in relationship to 

the horizon, which represents the camera or the audience's eye level. The 
increasing or decreasing lengths of strides must be worked out by defining 
measuring points for every few drawings. Estimation is possible, but must be 
plotted out carefully. 


y 
IN 


A ai" 
\ 


ii 


(Mi 


NA 


oc 
Z— Nh 


——e LV VY i 


Spacing of Drawings in Perspective Animation 


Variation in perspective can be achieved by lowering the horizon and 
changing the vanishing point during animation. This, however, requires 
some experience. Weight must be evident in all perspective animation. 

In a perspective shot, a character can run from the foreground over the 
horizon in a few frames, approximately 12 to 16, provided the right degree 
of ‘anticipation’ is given. Because of the speed of the action, it is better to use 
single frame animation. 


Effective animation requires movement in space and an illusion of three 
dimensions, otherwise the characters may appear to be too flat. Take 
advantage where possible of opportunities for movement in exaggerated 
perspective. For instance, if some part of a figure or object swings round close 
to the camera, emphasize the increase in size in the drawings. 


CA rapid perspective gallop. There was one drawing in between each pair of positions. 


103 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 53 In anormal walk, a horse's front legs step half a pace later than the back legs. The body and head tilt slightly as a result of the alternate 
stepping of the back and front legs. On the right, a cow walking, from Animal Farm. 


104 


Timing Animals’ Movements 


Timing Animals’ Movements 


Horses 


The order in which the feet of a horse touch the ground is: back left, front left, 
back right, front right, back left, front left, back right, front right, etc. 


A horse normally takes about a second to make one complete stride, i.e. from 
‘pack left’ to ‘back left’ If it is walking freely the feet touch the ground at equal 
intervals of time. 


If 24 frames are taken as the length of a walk cycle, i.e. back left hits the 
ground on frame 1, ‘back right’ hits the ground on frame 13, and ‘front left’ and 
‘front right’ hit the ground on frames 7 and 19 respectively. 


In the step position on the back legs, on frames 1 and 13, the back legs 

form two sides of a triangle. The rump is lower than it is on frames 7 and 19, 
where one leg is vertical as the other one passes it. The shoulders are lower 
on frames 7 and 19 than they are on frames 1 and 13 for the same reason. 
This causes a slight rocking movement to the line of the horse’s back. Also on 
the front step positions, as the shoulders go down, the head is pulled into a 
slightly more horizontal slant than it is on frames 1 and 13. 


105 


Other Quadrupeds 


Other Quadrupeds 


Other quadrupeds, like cows, are surprisingly similar in the timing of their 
walk to a horse. The order of the feet is usually the same and the movements 
of the back and the head follow the same pattern. 


An elephant may take a second or perhaps a second and a half to make a 
complete stride, whilst a smaller animal such as a cat may take a complete 
stride in half a second or less, although these timings may vary greatly. 


Some animals, such as the deer family, lift their feet high when walking; cats 
also do this when stalking. There is no equivalent of the ‘squash’ position of a 
human walk in a four-footed walk, as the back foot of each pair usually comes 
off the ground immediately the front foot is on the ground. 


Predators of the cat family (lions, cougars, housecats) possess a more flexible 
dorsal construction in their spine. This gives their motion a wiry grace and 

the ability to change direction very rapidly. Because felines have more of a 
radius bone in their front forelegs than dogs or cows, they can turn their paws 
inward (pronator-supernator action). 


A walking animal spends roughly half the time supported by two legs and the 
other half supported by three. A four-footed animal starting a walk usually 
starts with one of its back legs, followed by the front leg on the same side. 


FIGURE 54 Parts of cycles ofa 
tiger and a deer walking. In both 
cycles drawing 17 has the opposite 
feet positions to drawing 1, so the 
complete repeat would take 32 frames. 
Although the length of stride is the 
same in both these examples, note 
the difference in feeling. The tiger has 
a crouched menacing attitude, whilst 
the exaggerated lift of the legs helps 
the deer’s motion to be bouncy and 
light. 


107 


Timing for Animation 


Timing an Animal's Gallop 


A horse increases its speed from a walk, to a trot, then a canter and finally to a 
gallop, at which it travels at maximum speed. 


In the gallop a complete stride takes about half a second, and the order in 
which the feet hit the ground is: back left, back right, front left, front right— 
pause—back left, back right, front left, front right, etc. The back legs make the 
same movement as each other with a slight time lag and the same happens 
with the front feet. The big push is given by the front feet and after this push 
the animal becomes momentarily airborne. 


In some animals, for instance the cat, the bigger push comes from the back 
legs and the cat becomes airborne after this movement. The shoulders and 
rump rise and fall giving a rocking movement to the line of the back, and the 
head is tilted at a slightly more horizontal angle as the shoulders go down 


FIGURE55 The flexibility of the 

pastern or wrist joint of a quadruped 
during a gallop is particularly 
noticeable. This joint can bend 
backward into almost a right angle 
as it takes the weight of the animal 


(drawings 1 and 7), and can also bend 


into almost a right angle the other way 


when relaxed and the foot is in the air 
(drawings 2, 3, 5, etc.). 


108 


Timing an Animal’s Gallop 


and the front legs take the weight. The spine itself also flexes and extends. 
This is very noticeable with a cat, as when the back legs come forward a 
pronounced hump appears in the lower half of the back, and as the back legs 
push the body into the spring, the spine stretches out into a reverse curve. 
The movement of the hip joint comes strongly into play in a gallop and the 
forward and backward movement of the thighs, combined with the bending 
and stretching of the spine, gives the impression that the animal's body is 
alternately lengthening and shortening. When the big leap comes from the 
back legs, as with a cat, the order of feet hitting the ground is: back left, back 
right—pause—front right, front left, back left, back right, etc. The complete 
stride of a cat takes about {1/3} second. 


109 


Timing for Animation 


Bird Flight 


Birds are well adapted to fast movement through the air. They are streamlined 
and waste the minimum amount of energy in the air. The body enhances the 
movement by lying in the direction of the airflow. The legs are tucked up or 
trailed in flight. 


The aerodynamics of bird flight is very complex and it is unnecessary to go 
into detail. The power stroke is the downward stroke against the cushion of air 
beneath the bird, and during it the air resistance closes the feathers and the 
wing makes as large an area as possible, to maximize the thrust. Birds have 
very large chest muscles to power the downstroke. The muscles controlling 
the upstroke are much smaller, as the air resistance is much less. During 

this stroke the wing folds partially to present a smaller surface area and the 
feathers tend to separate like vanes to allow the air to pass between them. 
The body is usually tilted slightly upwards at the head, is lifted slightly during 
the downstroke and falls again during the upstroke. 


In normal flight the wing strokes are not straight up and down. The direction 
of beat is slightly backward on the upstroke and slightly forwards on the 
downstroke. This is the opposite of what might be expected for forward flight, 
but the forward impetus is actually given by the tilt of the wing surfaces. 

This forward and backward wing beat is particularly noticeable when the 

bird is hovering (the body may be almost vertical and the wing beat almost 
horizontal) and also when the bird is rising or coming in to land. 


During a flying cycle, the upstroke and the downstroke take about the same 
time although with larger birds at least, the downstroke is slower. The length 
of the repeat depends on the size of the bird. On the whole a large bird moves 
more slowly than a small one. For example, a sparrow may make 12 complete 
wing beats in a second, whilst a heron or a stork may make only two. 


(A) 


110 


Bird Flight 


FIGURE56 AA pigeon hovering as it comes in to land, from Animal Farm. Note the upright position of the body and the circling movement of the 
wings. B 1—9is a repeat flying cycle. The body dips slightly in the air on 1 and rises slightly on 6 as the wings press downwards. The wingtip feathers 
radiate from the ‘wrist’ and trail backward in the direction they are coming from to give flexibility. Note how these feathers separate on the upstroke—7 
and 8—to allow the air to pass between them. 


Timing for Animation 


Drybrush (Speed Lines) and Motion Blur 


Drybrush (speed lines) and motion blur are ways an animator illustrates the 
optical blur the eye sees when an object is moving too rapidly to be seen 
clearly. In traditional animation, the speed line is a throwback with its origins 
in the graphic representations of rapid movement done in early newspaper 
cartoons. In later cartoons the speed line was replaced by drybrush. 


This was a smeared drawing created by the cel painter by dabbing excess 
moisture from the paintbrush and streaking the character's colors in the 
direction of the line of movement. In digital animation the same effect is done 
by using the control that adds a motion blur. This effect creates a blur of the 
action similar to the blurry images of rapid action in live action photography. 


FIGURE 57 A Speed lines disappear where 


they are formed or move ina slightly 

opposite direction to that of the object a ee 
causing them. B and C€ Speed lines left by 

rapidly moving objects. 


112 


Drybrush (Speed Lines) and Motion Blur 


While drybrush is an effect painted right onto the individual frames, the 
motion blur is an effect that is turned on in the computer. The motion 

blur does not appear in any single frame; it is always on and reveals how a 
character moves between frames. One may even want the blur to be visible, 
so it would match the well-known appearance of a live action film. This can be 
achieved by increasing the distance between the frames movement. 
Aesthetically, some still prefer the graphic approach of the speed line or 
drybrush, even in digital work. It remains a creative choice. 


Drybrush (speed lines) should be timed quickly so that by the time the 
audience is aware of it, it is gone. Using drybrush for three frames is about 
the minimum effective length, but some spectacular examples can extend 
to 16 frames or more. The important factor to remember is that drybrush is 
something left behind by the object causing it. It must not move with the 
object as this gives the impression of threads attached to it. 


If a stick swishes through the air and two consecutive drawings are widely 
spaced, the drybrush would consist of curves, carefully drawn in the direction 
of the swish, and a number of lines representing several in-between positions 


D A character zooms off screen. E A more elaborate drybrush trail, taking 16 frames or more to disperse. This would also move in the opposite direction to 
that of the character causing it. 


113 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 58 The whipcrack is all on single frames. The accent is on drawing 5, where the curvature of the whip reverses. In the gunshot, drawings 2, 3, 4 and 
5 are single frames. 6 and 7 are double frames, with perhaps two or three more inbetweens slowing into the hold on 8. The accent is on drawing 4. 


114 


Accentuating a Movement 


of the stick. These would all be put on cel in the color of the stick. On the next 
few drawings, this drybrush would be animated away (i.e. diminished to zero) 
in the same place as it originated, or moving very slightly in the opposite 
direction to the stick. In the meantime, further drybrush may have appeared. 
This would be animated out in the same way. 


Drybrush should be used very sparingly and should be saved for situations 
where drawings are so widely spaced that the eye has difficulty in connecting 
them up. If the spacing of drawings is well done and fast action well 
anticipated, the eye accepts very widely spaced drawings without trouble. 


A more spectacular drybrush effect might be used when a character runs 

off screen. For example, if a character is about to zip off right, he anticipates 

to the left, accelerates to the right and goes off very fast. This may not work 
without drawing in some drybrush streaks as he runs off, moving them rapidly 
to the left and following each other in a series of eddies. This can easily be 
continued for 16 frames or so, but must move rather quickly. 


Accentuating a Movement 


In order to emphasize a movement, the introduction of a visual effect is 
sometimes advisable. Such an effect does help to draw attention to the point 
the animator intends to make, especially if the movement is a quick one. The 
effect, however, must be a visual complement to the movement and should 
grow out of the type of action on the screen. It should also be quick and not 
labored, which could easily spoil the whole effect. 


In the case of the fight sequence between the farmers and the animals in 
revolt in Animal Farm such extra effects were introduced to heighten the 
sequence’s dramatic excitement. 


The farmer's whipcrack, for example, was a sequence of eight drawings on 
single frames. At the accent of the movement, which was where the curvature 
of the whip reversed direction, a three frame, white ‘crack’ effect appeared (see 
page 114). The accent of the gunshot movement was where the gun barrel 
suddenly recoiled. The shot itself was made visible by a strong ‘swish’ effect 
followed by a slower puff of smoke as the gun barrel came forward again. 


Since every situation is different, it is best to make any decisions about visual 
effects during the process of animation. 


115 


J] , 
Se 


Strobing 


Strobing 


Strobing is an effect which is an integral part of the mechanism of the cinema. 
Indeed the stroboscope, invented in 1832, was the first device used to present 
the illusion of a moving picture. The reflections of images on a spinning disc 
were viewed through slits around the edge of the disc so that a series of 
static images were seen in quick succession. A similar device, using the same 
principle, was the zoetrope in which paper strips were viewed through slits in 
a rotating cylinder. 


Strobing is liable to occur in the movement of an object, which has a number 
of equally spaced similar elements. Some examples are the rungs of a ladder 
or the spokes of a wheel. 


If a drawing of a ladder has rungs drawn 1 inch apart and the ladder starts 

to move along its length at an increasing speed, all is well until the amount 
of movement on the ladder is just under % inch. At this point the rungs 
begin to flicker and when the ladder moves up exactly 2 inch per frame, the 
movement is completely confused. This is because the eye sees a set of rungs 
on one frame and on the next frame it sees a set of rungs halfway between 
those on the first frame, and does not know whether the original rungs have 
moved to the right or to the left. On the next frame again, the rungs on the 
first frame have moved along 1 inch and so are superimposed over the rungs 
on the first frame. This gives the impression that the rungs are flickering on 
and off on alternate frames. If the movement is more than 1% inch, say 0.7 
inches to the right, the eye jumps across the shorter gap and the rungs appear 
to move 0.3 inches to the left. This is the reason for the well-known illusion of 
stagecoach wheels appearing to turn backward. 


The best cure for this strobing effect is to avoid situations where it may occur. 
The spokes of a wheel should be as widely spaced as possible. One time- 
honored solution is to have one broken spoke so that the gap can be seen 
rotating. Another way of overcoming this problem is to show the rim of the 
wheel rotating, but depict the spokes themselves as whizzing round with a 
drybrush effect. 


A wheel, or ladder, always animates comfortably in the direction required if it 
moves by up to one third of the distance between one spoke, or rung, and the 
next. At faster speeds, if the broken rung dodge does not work, either avoid 
the sequence altogether, or work on it with drybrush to suggest the speed at 
which it is going. 


Strobing can also occur on background pans (see opposite). 


117 


Timing for Animation 


Fast Run Cycles 


An eight frame run cycle—that is four frames to each step—gives a fast and 
vigorous dash. At this speed the successive leg positions are quite widely 
separated and may need drybrush or speed lines to make the movement flow. 
Drawing 5 shows the same position as drawing 1 but with opposite arms and 
feet. Similarly drawings 6 and 2, 7 and 3, and 8 and 4 show the same positions. 
These alternate positions should be varied slightly in each case, to avoid the 
rather mechanical effect of the same positions occurring every four frames. 


A 12 frame cycle gives a less frantic run, but if the cycle is more than 16 frames 
the movement tends to lose its dash and appear too leisurely. 


The body normally leans forward in the direction of movement, although for 
comic effect a backward lean can sometimes work. If a faster run than an eight 
frame repeat is needed, then perhaps several foot positions can be given on 
each drawing, to fill up the gaps in the movement, or possibly the legs can 
become a complete blur treated entirely in drybrush. 


In the first example, drawing 4 is equivalent to the ‘step’ position in a walk, 
with the maximum forward and backward leg and arm movement. In a run it 
is also the point at which the centre of gravity of the body is farthest from the 
ground, that is, in mid-stride. In drawing 1 the weight is returning to its lowest 
point, which is in drawing 2. In drawing 3 the body starts to rise again as the 
thrust of the back foot gives the forward impetus for the next stride. 


FIGURE 60 These are both examples of eight frame run cycles. This means four drawings to each step. 
Drawings 1 and 5 show the same leg and arm positions but with opposite feet and so do 2 and 6, 3 and 7, 4 and 8. 
In such a short cycle these positions should be varied slightly to avoid a mechanical effect. 


118 


Fast Run Cycles bt 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 61 


eelings and 


e needs 0 


aggressive t 
ather angu 
when afraid 
back and be 


Facial expression is an 


important part of characterization, 
but use the whole body to express 


emotions. The drawing 


of a character can be adapted to meet 


mood—in benevolent 


moments a character would be drawn 
in soft, curved lines; when more 


e drawing would become 
ar with more straight lines; 
he or she would shrink 

come more spiky, their hair 


“a 


anding o 


120 


end, and so on. 


Characterization (Acting) 


Character animation is the ultimate achievement of animation art. It is a 
complex combination of craftsmanship, mastery of the science of natural 
movement, acting and timing. When successful, it can feel to the animator like 
an Olympian moment of creation. The artist not only fulfills the needs of the 
performance as indicated by the script, but they are also responsible for the 
birth of an independent personality—a Bugs Bunny, Ariel the Little Mermaid or 
Bart Simpson. The characters’ appeal is much more than just the voice actors’ 
tones, the writers’ wit, the animators’ technique or the designers’ style. They are 
the sum of all their parts. And when done successfully, the audience comes to 
know the character better than their own families and friends. You have it in 
your power to create memories that people will cherish for decades after. 


Characterization in animation is concerned not so much with what the 
characters do, as how they do it. The old vaudeville (music hall ) adage was 
‘It’s not the opening of a door that is funny, it’s when you open a door funny’ 
The audience is conditioned to look at human characters in human situations. 
In animation this can only be a starting point. The cartoon character should 
not behave exactly like a human being. It would feel and look wrong. Human 
reactions and human actions must be exaggerated, sometimes simplified, 
and distorted in order to achieve a dramatic or comic effect in cartoon. Good 
character animation is not merely the copying of life—it is the caricature of 
life, life plussed. 


Characterization (Acting) 


y 
rh 
BENEVOLENCE 


sa) Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 62 Two extremes of mood. On the left, animated on double frames, abject misery because the character has been rejected. On the right, general 
mayhem caused by the character being given a live electric plug to hold. 


122 


The Use of Timing to Suggest Mood 


For these reasons the features of characters must be kept simple, allowing 

for maximum facial expression. The key positions should be sufficiently 
expressive, and held for a long enough period of time, to transmit the 
message to the audience. In animation, such transmission is easier in 
movement than in live action. When a movement is over-exaggerated it tends 
to create a sense of comedy. This is especially the case in fast movement. 

A deliberate exaggeration of speed, therefore, is the basis of timing for 
caricature as, for instance, in the case of Tom and Jerry cartoons. Slower pacing 
requires greater emphasis on expression and characterization of the subject. It 
requires more subtle animation, and it is infinitely more difficult to handle. 


In the beginning we all animate ourselves, because we understand most 
intuitively how we would do actions and solve problems. Acting means to put 
ourselves into another’s mind to see how they would solve problems. How 
would | move if | were a Sumo wrestler? A ballerina? A Wall Street tycoon? An 
elderly person leaning on a walker? Not only would all of these characters 
move in a different way, but even the tempo of their movements would 

be different. Some of the old Disney animators used to work with a piano 
teacher’s metronome on their desks. This enabled them to assign a particular 
tempo to a planned animated character. 


Many animators augment their animation training with some course in 

acting and/or mime. To expand their technique, animators also studied the 
same principles that great teachers such as Constantin Stanislavksy and Lee 
Strassberg wrote for flesh and blood actors. What we are doing on screen is in 
fact acting, except instead of using our bodies as our means of expression, we 
use our drawn characters. 


The Use of Timing to Suggest Mood 


The creation of mood is the stock-in-trade both of the cinema and the 
theater. It is also important in animated films but, as animation is a medium of 
exaggeration, it is advisable to avoid subtle shades of expression. 


In general terms, the moods of depression, dejection, sorrow, etc. depend 

on slow timing for their effect, whilst the moods of elation, joy, triumph and 
so on depend on quicker timing. Other moods, such as wonder, puzzlement 
and suspicion may depend on facial expression and body posture. The aim is 
always, however, to convey to the audience the mental state of the character, 
and match this to the mood of the backgrounds, the camera movements, and 
everything else which contributes to the visual effect on the screen. 


123 


<= 
= 
~ 
cS 
= 
Ss 
<x 
— 
& 
>>) 
= 
= 
— 


i 


| 


| 


124 


FIGURE 63 Anemotiona 


speaks the 


the pitch a 


important accen 


dvo 


mopresario 


ine: ‘They can’t do this to 
me!’ The broken 
phonetic breakd 


, wavy line on the 
own strip represents 
lume of the voice. The 
ts in the soundtrack 


are on ‘can't’ and‘me’so the pattern 


of movement sh 


vowels int 


ould emphasize the 


ese 


wo words. 


Synchronizing Animation to Speech 


To express depression, the character must appear to have no energy. His 
body droops forwards, his head hangs on his chest, his knees sag, and his 
movements are slow, with frequent long holds and sighs. Anything that 
can be used in the drawing to convey the feeling of depression should be 
used—the hair and clothes hang limp, perhaps the hat sinks down over the 
ears, and the shoes squash with the extra weight of gloom. 


Elation and joy, on the other hand, need plenty of energy, which gives quick, 
bouncy movements with the character frequently airborne. The body is 
upright or curving backward, with hair and clothing springy, and a general 
lightness of step. 


Suspicion requires a deliberate expression of puzzlement and cannot 

be hurriedly timed. Give enough time for the audience to read the facial 
expression of the character and animate his hands for further emphasis if 
there is time. 


Synchronizing Animation to Speech 


Unlike live action films, where the dialog is simultaneously recorded with the 
action, in animation it must be recorded beforehand so that the movement 
can be fitted to it precisely. It is an essential pre-production operation, which 
cannot be left until after the completion of animation. 


Once the soundtrack is available (either on tape or digital file), the type and 
character of the voice can be analyzed through the use of a synchronizer 
(16mm or 35mm) and a frame-by-frame timing guide for the animation can 
be made. This can be done either on the exposure chart, where there is a 
special column for it, or on a separate chart. In either case, it must be done 

in terms of frame analysis. No two dialog performances are the same. Even 
single words like ‘you, ‘yes; ‘no, ‘its, ‘had’ can vary substantially when analyzed 
in terms of separate frames. Such information is the basis of fitting animation 
to sound. 


Firstly, listen carefully to the soundtrack and in particular to the feeling 
behind the way in which the words are spoken. Then listen to the phrasing 
and rhythm of the speech and find the positions of the main emphasis and 
key words. Then plan the movements of the character's body, head, arms, 

etc. to fit the words and the way in which they are being said, to reinforce 

the dramatic effect. Try to emphasize the main points of the speech with the 
whole body, if time and budget permit it. In animation, the meaning of dialog 
should be somewhat overemphasized, especially in an entertainment film. 


125 


Timing for Animation 


Lip-Sync—1 


In full animation, it is important for a character to mime. When speaking, 
therefore, their miming must be accurately synchronized to the soundtrack. 
Dialog is invariably recorded before production and the timing of it is 
passed to the animator as a phonetic breakdown. It is also important that 
the animator has a copy of the track on tape, so that they can listen to it 
repeatedly until the pattern of emphasis, the rise and fall of the voice, etc. 

is clear in their mind. It is sometimes useful to indicate this alongside the 
phonetic breakdown by means of a line which moves left and right as the 
voice falls and rises, and becomes thicker and thinner according to the degree 
of emphasis. Usually the voice rises on important syllables or words and falls 
on less important ones. 


FIGURE 64 A sequence of drawings 
in which the whole body is involved 
in lip-sync. After a preliminary loss 
of temper and intake of breath, the 
sergeant major shouts: ‘That man 
there!’ From The Guardsman, a Halas 


and Batchelor commercial for TV. 


126 


i= 
(=) 
=] 
co 
= 
i= 
<= 
— 
= 
i=)) 
= 
= 
— 


128 


Lip-Sync—2 


The first step is to make the character's actions fit his words. If he is aggressive 
he will tend to thrust himself forward and reinforce certain points with 
gestures. If he is shy he may shrink away and speak apologetically, and if he is 
crafty he may pretend to smile, whilst giving quick glances to see the reaction 
to his words, and so on. 


The second step consists of moving the character's lips, and perhaps the lower 
part of the face, to fit the frame-by-frame phonetic breakdown of the speech 
on the exposure chart. Here it is important to listen repeatedly to the way 

the dialog is spoken. There is a broad tendency for the mouth and lower jaw 
to open on a vowel sound and close on a consonant. In a normally spoken 
sentence there are usually a few accentuated vowel sounds, and the rest of 
the words are of lesser importance. Play the soundtrack over and over again 
until the pattern of emphasis, the rise and fall of the voice, etc. is clear. Then 
plan the lip-sync to conform to this pattern in visual terms. 


As already mentioned, in mass-produced TV series the dialog carries the 
central interest of the film and there is practically no animation, apart from the 
mouth. This is not acceptable in other types of production, and it is therefore 
important to ensure first of all that the mouth, eyes and other features of the 
face express the meaning of the dialog. The hands should also be used for 
emphasis. Thirdly, the body itself should be used to underline the content. The 
three elements have, of course, to be closely coordinated. 


Lip-Sync—2 


129 


Timing for Animation 


Lip-Sync—3 
Once the basic timing of mouth movement is worked out, the next stage is to 


consider how the facial expression, head movement and body gestures can 
underline and add to the meaning and interest of the dialog. 


In Old Major's first speech in Animal Farm, it was especially important to 
convey the message of this character to the audience, since the whole film 
was motivated by it. The facial expression had to show not only the figure’s 
sincere concern but, as an ailing character, physical pain as well. The entire 
body of the pig was unanimated while it’s face, eyes, mouth, snout and the 
facial creases conveyed the emotions of the character. 


It is not essential to animate all vowels and consonants in terms of single 
frames. Especially in a TV entertainment series, where speed of production is 
essential, about eight positions of mouth and tongue are adequate. 


pistes 
LN (N\ ¢ X 


\ ouk Ch 


130 


Lip-Sync—3 


= 


‘M,B,P’-‘A B‘O,AW~‘00’— ‘EE’ — “F-DNGKLR= ST" 


FIGURE 66 Top Eight mouth positions which, with a few inbetweens, would cover most lip-sync possibilities in limited animation. Bottom Lip-sync 
with full animation. The pig says: ‘Our children are born.’ 


Wy 


131 


res 


HPP |e 
| a 


\ 


Timing and Music 


Timing and Music 


Ever since the very first animated productions, Disney's Steamboat Mickey 
and Oskar Fischinger’s abstract film Composition in Blue, it has been clear 
that there is a strong relationship between animation and music. This 
relationship can be explained on two accounts. First, both elements have a 
basic mathematical foundation and move forward at a determined speed. 
Second, since animation is created manually frame-by-frame, it can be fitted 
to music in a very exact manner. It is further able to capture its rhythm, its 
mood and hit the beat right to the frame. Most animation makes good use of 
this advantage. 


As a general principle it is more difficult to follow the rhythm of a musical 
composition with its mood than its beat. The latter aspect of the music is 
easily measured, since beats are fitted into bar units of defined time length 
and are interpreted in time units. 


Bars can contain various numbers of beats and these must be measured to 
the film frame. Having done this, it is comparatively easy to fit the animation 
to the speed of the beat and find the right type of movement to follow the 
music, whether it is a slow waltz of 36 frames or four frames for rock music. A 
beat can be emphasized by synchronization of the feet but it works better if 
the whole body is used. In quick beats of three, four or six frames it is possible 
to follow every second beat without losing the rhythm. It is always better to 
work to specially prepared music if this can be afforded. 


FIGURE 67 A This eight frame cycle, animated on double frames, of a whirling Spanish dancer is fitted closely 
to strong flamenco music. The figure fully conveys the character of the music with all its functional simplicity. 
B Single and double frame animation are alternated to fit the beats of the sound of a Spanish guitar. It is 
essential for the movement to follow the musical lead of a specially pre-recorded music track, for accurate 
synchronization. 


133 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE68 A 
of tracks is fina 
in the ‘camera i 
e exposure 
accompanying 
Enlargement of 
B, inverted for 


[s) 
S 
+ 


he director's tin 


structions’ col 
sheet. B The 


field key (layout). 
m Fig. 


field centers fro 


se as table mov 


Another examp 
a table tilt. 


e of a track incl 


ing 


ized by the animator 


mn 
C 


e.D 
ding 


Traditional Camera Movements 


Traditional Camera Movements 


Before the Digital Age all animation was shot on a down shooter camera, called 
at times a‘Rostrum camera’ or an ‘Oxberry camera, named after the American 
engineer John Oxberry (1918-1974) who designed an industry-standard camera 
stand. These cameras set-ups could be as simple as a home camera with a single 
frame shutter, clamped on a shelf or table, up to the huge, motorized two-column 
professional camera stands. But, in most cases, the set-up was similar: a single 
frame camera was mounted on a column and the animation artwork was placed 
on pegs on a compound table and held down by a heavy glass plate called a 
‘platen: The table had long top and bottom peg bars to move (pan) artwork, 
could rotate 360 degrees (a’'tilt’angle) and was equipped with a light box 
underneath to do bottom-lit shots. The camera had an auto-focus so no matter 
how the camera or artwork moved, the lens adjusted. The earliest camera stands 
even had wooden frames, where camerapeople would pin artwork not in use. 


Tracks (‘Truck in’ and ‘Truck out’ in the USA) are used to move into a closer field 

or pull back to a more distant one. This is done by moving the camera frame-by- 
frame, up or down its vertical pillar, above the animation drawings. Usually the 
field center also moves during a track and, as the camera travels on a fixed axis, 
this movement in a north-south, east-west direction is done by moving the table. 


Tracks and table moves are worked out in terms of general timing—track 
lengths and the action which the various fields must include—preliminarily 
by the director on exposure sheets before production begins, then refined by 
a scene planner. 


When the animator finalizes the action of the scene in detail, the scene planner 
converts the director's timing into specific instructions to the cameraperson. He or 
she writes down the field sizes and marks the frames where camera movements 
start and stop in the ‘camera instructions’ column on the exposure chart (Fig. A). 
They also provide a drawn field key with field centers marked (Fig. B). 


It then becomes the cameraman’s responsibility to execute the required move 
smoothly and accurately on the screen. Briefly, the procedure is as follows: 

in Fig. B the track is made from field X to field Y so the screen center moves 
towards the south-east. This means that under the camera, the table must 
move north-west. Fig. C is an enlargement of this table move, showing how 
the cameraperson divides the line to achieve a smooth movement from X to Y. 
At the same time they measure the distance the camera travels on its column 
during the track, and divide this in exactly the same way as Fig, C, so that 
camera and table top move smoothly together. Fig. D is a similar track and 
table move which includes a tilt. This would also be done as a table move. 


Tracks and table moves are usually animated on single frames. 


135 


i Timing for Animation 


ee Vasc Oe 


Ee appar 
- Was cS 
| Figo ee 


Loe es 


Ch ma 


—_—-—— 
PEG' SETTING 


136 


3D Camera Moves 


3D Camera Moves 


The transition to computer technologies has greatly altered the job of 
creating camera moves in animation. Even in most traditionally animated-on- 
paper films, the down shooter camera stand has been replaced with a digital 
scanning system and elements painted digitally. In big budget 3D projects, all 
the animation is produced digitally, so a camera is no longer necessary. Artists 
planning camera moves no longer draw paper camera guides (drawn field 
key Fig. B on page 134), since the moves are blocked out virtually and tested 
in real time. Fig. C (on page 134), the movement track between fields X and Y, 
has been replaced with a virtual track on your computer screen called a‘path 
of action’ This is controlled with spline curves, which are bent to modify the 
shape, timing and acceleration of motion between the key positions. 


In traditional paper animation, you moved artwork under a stationary camera, 
so to achieve a north-west move you moved the artwork on the table south- 
east. In digital animation, the virtual camera now moves around the subjects, 
much like a live action camera. Previously difficult tracking shots, like hand- 
held camera or racking the focus from foreground to background, can now be 
done with relative ease. In the past you had to describe the movement to the 
camera, now the camera describes itself to you by immediate playback. 


In high-end Hollywood productions, the director oversees the creation 

of the storyboard as an animatic, with some perfunctory camera moves 
already laid in. The layout supervisor or pre-visualization director will plan 

out a rough camera pass—the virtual workbook. In some cases, a live action 
cinematographer (DP) or production designer would be invited to confer with 
the director about the positioning of the camera. As stated in the chapter 

on storyboarding, the rough layout pass has become more like a live action 
camera rehearsal with geometric avatars standing in for the actors. 


As the animation is being done, the camera moves can be sweetened to 
better accommodate the performance. There is much more give and take 
than in the more departmentalized assembly lines of the past. Then, after 
animation is completed, the layout supervisor and director consult on a final 
camera pass. Since the animation is done in 3D, the director can change their 
mind to alter the camera angle radically without the artwork having to be 
redone. So something animated in a simple flat proscenium set-up can be 
rotated 90 degrees and made an upshot with an added fish-eye lens effect. 
All this can be done with little impact on the completed artwork. This last 
step is only done in 3D as in 2D some of the distortions and optical tricks 
accomplished in the drawings by the artist preclude a last minute change of 
camera angle. 


FIGURE69 A An example of peg 
movements written out by the 
animator in accordance with the 
director's timing. The walk cycle 1L— 
24L is on the left, and in the ‘camera 
instructions’ column the bottom peg 
moves are on the left in decimals of an 


inch, and the top peg moves are on the 
ight. B, Cand D show the positions 

of the top and bottom peg bars at 
e top, middle and bottom of Fig. A 
espectively. 


137 


Timing for Animation 


Peg Movements in Traditional Animation 


Unlike camera movements, Compensating Pan or Peg Bar moves are synched 
directly with the character animation levels, and therefore need to be 
calculated by the animator instead of being left for others. An example of a 
compensating pan for instance, is when a painted background stops panning 
at the speed with which the character stops walking and comes to a rest, 

or if a character gains momentum to go out of frame while the background 
stops. When an object or character is moving across a background there are 
very often two and sometimes more sets of pegs working together, and their 
compensating movements need to be worked out in great detail at the same 
time as the drawings. 


In Figure 69, A is an example of peg instructions written out by the animator, 
and Figs B, C and D illustrate the timing problems involved. 


In the left-hand column of Fig. A is a 24 frame walk cycle, 1L-24L. The 
character makes a 1.8 inch stride in 12 frames on bottom pegs. This governs 
the speed of background pan on top pegs to 0.15 inches per frame, Fig. B. The 
director then called for a 1 sec pan ahead to a doorway, which the character 
is approaching on the right of the background, Fig. C. The animator therefore 
measures the distance ahead to the door, and by trial and error splits this up 
into a series of accelerating and decelerating moves to stop smoothly at the 
door on the required frame. The character and the background must work 
together so that his feet do not slip (in effect the character moves 0.15 inches 
to the right of the background per frame, no matter what the background 
does). So the bottom pegs start to move to the left—always 0.15 inches per 
frame less than the top pegs. At some point this will bring the character off 
screen, when he is replaced with a blank cel. If we imagine him continuing to 
walk off screen, then on an appropriate frame he starts to appear in screen 
again. At this point the bottom pegs are set so that his front toe is just in 
screen, Fig. D. The bottom pegs then pan to the right 0.15 inches per frame 
against the static background. 


The cycle 1L-24L would of course have to be on long cels with enough blank 
on the right of the character to pan him out of screen without the cel edge 
showing. 


138 


Peg Movements in 3D Animation 


Peg Movements in 3D Animation 


In digital 2D, whether created on paper and then scanned or drawn directly 
in a digital form, the peg bar or the notion of a peg bar is still the same. 

The main difference is that the peg bar is invisible to the camera, allowing 
for the animation to be scaled and positioned anywhere within the field of 
view. However, the basic structure laid out in the section ‘Peg movements in 
traditional animation’ remains the same. 


3D animation has made such problems as compensating peg bar moves a 
moot point. When walking your character in 3D, they have a true position 
within the virtual set. The camera's path of action would be calculated in the 
rough layout pass, then played back and refined as the animation is created. 


139 


= Timing for Animation 


et 


33325 37 39 


FIGURE 70 A sequence of key drawings with in-betweening scales. A mole squeezes himself up from his hole and puts on 
his spectacles, only to be stepped on a moment later Note the rounded feeling of all the shapes, to give him a non-aggressive, 
harmless look. From Butterfly Ball by Halas and Batchelor. 


140 


Peg Movements in 3D Animation 


a | 
a & 


13 144% 


FIGURE 71 An example of an emphatic point (see page 44). Anticipation on 1, out to extreme on 9, back to pose on 18, and into 
final pose on 22. 


Timing for Animation 


FIGURE 72 An example of a’take’ Farmer Jones is about to pick up his shotgun when it is stepped on by Boxer, the horse, trapping Jones's fingers. He tries 
to pull his hand away on drawing 3, then, after a quick wriggle of pain on drawing 5, looks up in surprise at Boxer on drawing 11. (From Animal Farm by 
Halas and Batchelor.) 


142 


Peg Movements in 3D Animation 


FIGURE 73 An example from Ryan Larkin’s 1969 film Walking which was entirely devoted to the mechanics of animated walking cycles. This example 
represents a 32 frame double frame cycle demonstrating how smoothly it is possible to carry out an extremely difficult human movement. It also makes 
good use of perspective animation through the exaggeration of the character's arm nearest to the camera. 


143 


Peg Movements in 3D Animation 


FIGURE 74 Animation samples enlarged from 
actual film frames show the timing of certai 
actions: 1 The Matador, in the film The Insolent 
Matador, fighting a furious bull. In spite of the 
igh speed of this action, it is possible to animate 
in double frames. The economy of work could be 
considerable and the audience would not notice 


=f iw 


e difference in the smoothness of the action. 
2 The bull charge in the film 7he Insolent Matador. 
Gesture and force of action convey the power and 
ry of this dangerous animal. Nevertheless, the 
action is conveyed in double frames and it loses 
none of its dynamism. 


145 


Peg Movements in 3D Animation 


2 i | 


FIGURE75 Rough 3D design of a dog walking. Courtesy Rhythm & Hues Studios. (©2008). 


147 


Timing for Animation 


Editing Animation 


Some like to think that because animated film is so carefully planned out 

in advance, the final editing becomes a simple task of stringing together 
shots. But in practice we find that the animated film can require the touch 
of an editing professional just as much as a live action film does. In addition, 
an editor possesses many more digital tricks to enhance the final film than 
they did in the age of guillotine splicers and tape. Most fades (‘dissolves’ 

in the USA) and wipes from one shot to another are now done in editorial. 
Editors can duplicate and flop shots, and even digitally correct small mistakes. 
Additionally, an editor is an artist in their own right, and they are sensitive to 
the overall pacing of the cuts and the overall timing of the film. After the work 
is done, there are many films that could still use a final tightening in editorial. 


If your budget does not permit the hiring of an editor and their top-line 
equipment, new 2D and 3D software programs make desktop editing a 
simple task. But just be sensitive to the special challenges each type of 
project presents. You would not edit an online game for preschoolers like a 
violently paced feature film. Over the years, editing styles have changed. Since 
the rock & roll video era of the 1980s, audiences are much more tolerant of 
rapid cutting and jump cuts than previous generations. In the first decade 
of the twenty-first century, the audience's taste for ‘reality’ shows spun off 
an interest in a more free-floating camera, and a deliberate awkwardness 

to the camerawork—this all to duplicate a‘man-on-the-scene’ home-made 
feel. The Sony Pictures 2007 film Surf's Up experimented with this to great 
effect. They animated and rendered their scenes the conventional way, then 
re-photographed the existing scenes with a separate camera to achieve the 
hand-held ‘reality show’ look. The 2008 Dreamworks Animation film Kung 
Fu Panda played with split screen images, sometimes having three separate 
scenes occurring up on the screen simultaneously. 


Editing for Feature Films 


Feature films are, for any company, a high stakes gamble, where all the stops 
are pulled to achieve the best cinematic experience possible. As taste in film 
changes with the times, so audiences expect animated films to keep pace. 
Animators should be open to experiment with new ideas in cutting, more 
interesting camera moves, and montages that challenge the normal idea of 
time and space. In the 1990s, Pixar adopted the custom used at Walt Disney 
years ago of trying out a new technique in a short first, then adapting what 
they learned into the feature projects. 


148 


Editing for Children’s Programming 


Editing for Television Episodes 


Episodic television is animated film produced in mass quantities. Characters 
develop over several episodes, and if you are lucky, several seasons. To produce 
such shows economically, more emphasis is placed on dialog and music than 
intricate and expensive one-time action scenes (refer back to page 14 ‘Directing 
for television’). In addition, you can cut around actions without having to show it. 
Japanese Anime films are particularly good in putting emphasis on interesting 
layout designs and establishing shots with simple character movement and 
repetitive facial set-ups for dialog, saving full animation for key important shots. 
This way they economize without hurting the overall quality. 


Editing for Children’s Programming 


Parent and consumer groups are aware that children are watching 
programming at a much younger age than ever before. Programs aimed at 
preschoolers have a particular set of rules all of their own: no fast cutting and 
little overlapping dialog; simple staging without a lot of inter-cutting; pauses 
placed in between important ideas for young minds to catch up; dialog and 
action paced in a gentle, non-threatening way; and large friendly colors with 
little shadows or effects. 


FIGURE 76 Image from the TV show Peep and the Big Wide World. (Copyright 2004, WGBH Educational Foundation. ‘Peep, ‘Chirp’ and ‘Quack’ were originally 
created by Kai Pindal for the National Film Board of Canada.) 


149 


Timing for Animation 


Editing for Internet Downloads 


Today many people around the world experience animation not ina 

theater, but on a hand-held computer or phone. This form of downloadable 
film has opened a brave new world to short film production. Because of 

the immediacy of the medium, only the most cutting edge and cleverest 
ideas reach the largest audiences, and that in the blink of an eye. To tap 

this audience, the filmmaker needs to be shrewd with their resources. You 
can't waste time on elaborate set-ups or subtle interplay of dialog. Your 
target audience is probably viewing in an open, noisy place, and has a short 
attention span. Small, visceral bits delivered with simple designs and staging 
will read better than a widescreen baroque spectacle. 


FIGURE 77 [ime 


n’ an animated short film created for the internet by JibJab. (Copyright © Jibjab 2008.) 


150 


Games 


The design and creation of interactive games has evolved from the humble 
Pong game of the late 1970s to mega-budget high-quality productions that 
rival the largest Hollywood blockbusters in complexity. The project is divided 
into two parts: the body of the game itself, and the cinematics—an elaborate 
narrative introduction to set up the backstory and the mood. Depending 
upon your budget, the cinematics can be as high quality as theatrical 
animation. Some games producers will even use a higher-end animation 
program like Maya to do the cinematics rather than the actual programs used 
in the game itself. 


The game itself is determined by the show's ‘assets, i.e. the numbers of 
controls on your character’s rig and the number of pre-made actions they 
have. Each character player has been given a library of modules—movements 
and gestures such as running, jumping, shooting, etc. The animator also needs 
to create bridges in between every conceivable pairing of actions. With the 
more realistic games, like war simulations, motion capture is used for much of 
the body actions. 


151 


c 
(=) 
=) 
cs 
= 
Cc 
<= 
— 
= 
i=)) 
= 
= 
— 


r—1974. 


oldes’ Hunge 


FIGURE 78 Peter F 


152 


FIGURE 79 Image of live actor—2D rendered character and 3D digital image. (Monster House © 2006 Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc. and GH One LLC. 
All Rights Reserved. Courtesy of Columbia Pictures.) 


153 


Timing for Animation 


Conclusion 


This book originally ended with an image from Peter Foldes’ pioneering 
computer animation piece, Hunger (1974). Its images look amusingly crude 

by today's standards. Halas and Whitaker mentioned the future potential of 
animating with a computer—that ‘it inevitably and eventually will become 

an added tool in the hands of animators’ This present volume takes the 
prophesy of the potential to the reality of now. Computer animation, digital, 
3D, whatever you care to call it, is the reality of our age. No longer theoretical, 
it is vital in the production of any animation today, including that which is 

still done by pencil and brush. The challenge to us in our present, and for our 
future, is to keep using the basic lessons taught to us by past masters like John 
Halas and Harold Whitaker. For their continued relevance is as vital to us as 
learning the latest software package. Being able to wield a hammer and chisel 
does not make you a Michelangelo; nor does raising a camera to your eye 
make you another Ansel Adams. So learning how to handle a specific software 
program, mastering the right buttons and levers to push, is only a small part 
of your animation education. 


This book should not be thought of as the final word in your education in 
the art of animation. It but serves to point the way to a lifetime of study 
to master the medium. A career in the arts is never as simple as mastering 
some technique, then collecting a paycheck. It is a journey of growth and 
experimentation. Our hope is that by the time you are done reading these 
words, we will have helped you along in your first steps. Good luck! 


154 


2D digital production timing, 21 

2D rendered characters, 153 

2D software programs for editing, 148 

2D storyboards, 8 

3D camera movement, 136-7, 139-47 

3D digital images, 153 

3D digital production timing, 21 

3D software programs for editing, 
82-3, 148 

3D storyboards, 8 

24 frames per second speed, 12-13, 45 

25 frames per second speed, 19 

101 Dalmations, 83 


A 


A Bug's Life, 6 
Accentuation of movement, 115 
Acting (characterization), 120-1 
Actor-based program timing, 22-3 
Adams, Ansel, 154 
Aesthetic and effects animation, 94-5 
Air resistance animation, 78-9 
Animal Farm: 

accentuation of movement, 115 

lip-sync, 130 

pigeon hovering, 111 

slow action, 47 

‘take’ 142 
Animal movements: 

cats, 106-7 

cows, 104, 107 

deer, 106-7 

donkeys, 44-5 

gallops, 103, 108-9 

horses, 104-5, 108-9 

quadrupeds, 106-7 
Anticipation animation, 56-7, 141 
Arm movement, 44-5, 64-5 
Arthur, 14 
As the Wrench Turns, 7 


Bailey, Greg, 14 
Balloons, 30-1 


Bar sheets, 16-17 

Bird flight, 110-11 
Bottom-light effects, 94 
Buscemi, Steve, 22 
Butterfly Ball, 140 


C 


Camera movement: 
3D, 136-7, 139-47 
traditional, 134-5 
Cannonballs, 30-1 
Car animation, 61 
Caricature and movement, 26-7 
Cartoons, 26-7, 79 
Cat family movement, 106-7, 
108-9 
Cause and effect, 28-30 
Characterization (acting), 120-1 
Characters: 
movement, 25-6 
reactions, 74-5 
Children’s programmes editing, 149 
Cinematics of games, 151 
Composition in Blue, 133 
Cows movement, 104, 107 
Crowd scenes, 82-3 
Cycles (repeat length), 80-1 


D 


Deer movement, 106-7 
DeMille, Cecil B., 5 
Depression (mood), 125 
Digital effects: 
animation, 94-5 
crowd scenes, 82-3 
production timing, 21 
storyboards, 7 
Directors: 
formats, 14 
responsibilities, 11 
‘slugging, 15 
timing, 18-19 
Disney, Walt, see Walt Disney pictures 
Dope streets (UK), 19 


Index 


Double frame animation, 52-3, 123-4, 
133 
Drawings: 
perspective animation, 102-3 
spacing, 42-4, 45-6 
Dreamworks Animation, 148 
Drybrush (speed lines), 112-15 


Editing: 
animation, 148 
children’s programming, 149 
feature film, 148 
internet downloads, 150 
television episodes, 149 
Energetic movements, 68-9, 
70-1 
Explosions, 92-3 
Eye movement in lip-sync, 128-9 


F 


Facial expression: 
characterization, 120-1 
features, 123 
lip-sync, 130-1 

Fast action timing, 48-9 

Fast punches, 49 

Fast run cycles, 118-19 

Feature films: 
editing, 148 
timing, 14 

Fire burning animation, 80, 85 

Fischinger, Oskar, 133 

Flags, waving, 81 

Flame animation, 77, 84-5 

Flexible joints and forces, 38-9 

Foldes, Peter, 152, 154 

Follow through, 58-9 

Forces: 
flexible joints, 38-9 
jointed limbs, 40-1 
repeat action timing, 73-4 
sawing action, 72-3 

fps see frames per second 


155 


Frames: 
double, 52-3 
single, 52-3 
frames per second (fps) speed, 12-13, 
19,45 
Friction effects, 78-9 
Full animation timing, 1 


G 


Galloping movement, 103, 108-9 
Games, 151-3 

Good timing, 2-3 

Gunshot effects, 114-15 


Hamilton (television series), 74-5 
Hammers, 66-7 
Head movement, 130-1 
Hitchcock, Alfred, 6 
Holds: 

length, 54-5 

timing, 50-1 
Horses movement, 104-5, 108-9 
Hunger, 152, 154 


Ideas ‘readability’; 1 

Inanimate objects: 
repeat movements, 96-7 
timing, 25, 34-5 

Internet downloads editing, 150 


J 


Joints: 
flexible, 39-40 
limbs, 41-2 
Joy (mood), 125 


K 


Kicking donkey movement, 44-5 
Kung Fu Panda, 148 


L 


Larkin, Ryan, 143 

Laws, movement, 2 

Laws of Motion (Newton), 3, 31-2 
Limbs, jointed, 40-1 

Lip-sync, 126-7, 128-9, 130-1 


156 


Massive software program, 82 
Meaning of movement, 2-3 
Michaelangelo, 154 
Miming, 126 
Miyazaki, Hayao, 76, 95 
Monster House, 22 
Mood suggestion, 122-5 
Motion blur, 112-15 
Mouth movement in lip-sync, 128-9 
Movement: 
accentuation, 115 
arm, 44-5, 64-5 
balloons, 30-1 
cameras 
3D, 136-7, 139-47 
traditional, 134-5 
cannonballs, 30-1 
caricature, 26-7 
cat family, 106-7, 108-9 
characters, 25-6 
cows, 104, 107 
deer, 106-7 
energetic, 68-70, 70-1 
eyes, 128-9 
galloping, 108-9 
head, 130-1 
horses, 104-5, 108-9 
inanimate objects, 96-7 
kicking donkey, 44-5 
laws, 2 
meaning, 2-3 
mouth, 128-9 
Newton's laws, 3, 31-2 
oscillating, 62-3 
peg, 136-8, 139-47 
quadrupeds, 106-7 
walk, 64-5, 98-100, 101 
Multiple character scenes, 82 
Music timing, 132-3 


Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind, 
76-7 
Newton's Laws of Motion, 3, 31-2 


O 


Objects thrown through the air, 32-3 
Oscillating movement, 62-3 
Overlapping action, 60-1 

Overseas production timing, 20 
Oxberry, John, 135 


P 


Paley, Nina, 94 
Peep and the Big Wild World, 149 
Peg movements: 
3D animation, 139-47 
traditional animation, 136-8 
walk cycle, 136-8 
Perspective animation and spacing of 
drawings, 102-3 
Properties of matter and animation, 
24-5 
Psycho, 6 


Rain animation, 90-1 

Ranft, Joe, 6 

‘Readability’ of ideas, 1 

Repeat movements for inanimate 
objects, 96-7 

Responsibilities of director, 11 

Rhythm & Hues, 83, 146-7 

Rope pulling, 64-5 

‘Rostrum camera, 135 

Rotating objects timing, 36-7 


Ss 


Sawing action, 72-3 
Scenes: 
digital crowd, 82-3 
multiple character, 82 
Simple harmonic motion, 42 
Single frame animation, 52-3, 63 
Sita Sings the Blues, 94 
Size and timing, 76-7 
Slow action timing, 46-7 
‘Slugging, 15 
Smoke animation, 84-5 
Snow animation, 91 
Spacing of drawings: 
description, 42-4, 45-6 
perspective animation, 102-3 
Speech synchronization, 124-5 
Spielberg, Steven, 5 
Spirited Away, 95 
Stanton, Nate, 6 
Steamboat Mickey, 133 
Storyboards: 
2D,8 
3D,8 
additional effects, 10 
animated films, 6 
description, 5 


digital, 7 
traditional, 5-6 
Strobing, 116-17 
Stroboscope, 117 
Surf's Up, 8, 148 
Suspicion (mood), 125 
Synchronization of speech, 124-5 


T 


‘Takes’: 
Animal Farm, 142 
character reactions, 74-5 
Television (TV): 
episode editing, 149 
series timing, 1 
timing, 14 
‘The Flood’ animation, 4 
The Guardsman, 126-7 
The Insolent Matador, 144-5 
The Little Mermaid, 6 
The Return of the King, 8 


Time For Some Campaignin’, 150 
Traditional animation timing, 18-19 
Traditional camera movements, 134-5 
TV see television 


U 


Unit of time in animation, 12-13 


V 


Vaudeville (music hall), 120 


WwW 


Walking (film), 143 
Walks: 
creature, 146-7 
style, 100-1 
Walt Disney pictures, 6, 83, 133, 148 
Water: 
animation, 86-9 


drops, 87,91 

pressure, 87 

spillage, 88 

timing for animation, 89 
Waving flags, 81 
Weight and force timing: 

energetic movements, 

68-9 

hammers, 66-7 

raising an arm, 64-5 

rope pulling, 64-5 

walking, 64 

weight lifting, 70-1 
Weightless drawings, 24-5 
Whipcrack animation, 114-15 
Wind animation, 78-9, 80 


X 


X sheets (USA), 19 


157 


