
DIRECTOR OF ANIMATION WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT 



A MANUAL OF METHODS, PRINCIPLES AND FORMULAS 

FOR CLASSICAL, COMPUTER, GAMES, STOP MOTION AND INTERNET ANIMATORS 











































To Imogen, 


co-conspirator and wife, without whom this book would certainly 
not exist - and the author might not be around to write it. 



I want this book to put over what I have found to be the best working methods, so that 
animating becomes better and easier to do. 

There are lots of formulas, principles, cliches and devices here to help, but the main thing i 
want to pass on is a way of thinking about animation in order to free the mind to do the best 
work possible. 

I learned it from the best in the business and I've boiled it ail down into a systematic working 
order. It transformed my work - I hope it will be useful to you. 


vi 




A cnmnifMTui! I did b.i^d gn a Frank Frazctt*Ji pokier 


CONTENTS 


1 WHY THIS BOOK? 

11 DRAWING IN TIME 

23 TIME TO DRAW 

35 IT'S ALL IN THE TIMING AND THE SPACING 
41 LESSON 1 

46 ADVANCING BACKWARDS TO 1940 

47 History of the Chart and Inbetween 

48 Extremes and Breakdowns 

57 Keys 

61 Three Ways to Animate 

68 Testing, Testing, Testing 

70 The X-Sheet 

75 Came the Dawn ... 

76 The Best Numbering System 

78 The Great Ones and Twos Battle 

80 The Top and Bottom Pegs Battle 















84 MORE ON SPACING 
88 .Classic Inbetween Mistakes 
90 Watch Your Arcs 

92 Getting More Movement Within the Mass 
96 The Elongated Inbetween 
99 The Major Beginner's Mistake 
99 The ‘Ruff Approach 

101 How Much Do We Leave To The Assistant? 

101 Take The Long Short Cut 

102 WALKS 

106 Getting the Weight 
109 Set the Tempo 

111 The Passing Position or Breakdown 

115 Two Ways to Plan a Walk 

118 The Double Bounce 

120 Loosening it Up 

128 D iggi n g Deeper i nto Wal ks 

135 There's Nothing Like Trying It 

136 The Heel 
136 Foot Action 

142 Normal Walk Spacing 

146 Weight Shift 

147 The Belt Line 

148 Arm Movements 
156 Counteraction 
163 The Recipe 

167 Sneaks 

173 The Tip Toe Sneak 

176 RUNS, JUMPS AND SKIPS 
189 The 4 Drawing Formula Run 
192 The 3 Drawing Run 
195 The 2 Drawing Run 

200 The Recipe 

201 Run, Jump, Skip and Leap 
209 Skips 

212 Jumps 

213 Weight on a Jump 



217 FLEXIBILITY 

218 The Breakdown 
223 Simple Overlap 
226 Overlapping Action 

230 Simple Counteraction 

231 Breaking Joints to Give Flexibility 
246 Flexibility in the Face 

249 Overlapping Action in the Face 
251 instant Read - Profiles for Readability 

256 WEIGHT 

262 Pressure and Weight 

264 How Much Effort Do We Have To Expend? 

269 Dancing 

272 Rules of Thumb On Synchronising Action 

273 ANTICIPATION 

282 Surprise Anticipations 

283 Invisible Anticipations 

285 TAKES AND ACCENTS 
295 A Hard Accent Bounces Back 
295 A Soft Accent continues 

297 TIMING, STAGGERS, WAVE AND WHIP 

297 Stagger Ti m i n gs 

299 The Side to Side Vibration Formula 

301 Whip Action 

301 Wave Action 

304 DIALOGUE 

305 Phrasing 

310 Picture and Sound Sync 

311 Accents 
314 Attitude 

314 The Secret 

315 ACTING 

320 Change of Expression 

321 Look for the Contrast 
323 An Acting Point 



324 

324 

325 

325 

327 

32S 

330 

333 

334 

334 

334 

335 

335 

335 

335 

335 

335 

335 

335 

335 

338 

338 

339 

342 

x 


Body Language 
Symmetry or 'Twinning' 
Steal It! 

Eyes 

ANIMAL ACTION 
Live Action Reference 
Basic Animal Walk Pattern 

DIRECTING 
The Brief 
The Leica Reel 
Separate the Characters 
Best Foot Forward 
Casting Animators 
Making Changes 
‘Say! Say!' 

Voice Recording 
Hook Ups 
Research 
Editing 

Believe in Your Material 

REVIEW 
The Procedure 
The Ingredients 
Acknowledgements 


e 

c; 


si £Z 
-2 n; 

t 

2 £ 
^ L= - i 

c 


G 

S < 

LU -O 
£ £ 

I 


S 


S Cl. 

* t 

I | 

g a 
fl 

fl 

© p 

| I 
“ £■ 

N 

&■ T: 























WHY THIS BOOK? 


When I was ten years old I bought a paperback book, How to Make Animated Cartoons, by Nat 
Falk, published in 1940. it's now long out of print, but I used it as a handy reference guide for 
1940s Hollywood cartoon styles when I designed the characters and directed the animation for 

Who Framed Roger Rabbit . 

More importantly for me, however, the book was clear and straightforward; the basic informa¬ 
tion of how animated films are made registered on my tiny ten-year-old brain and, when I took 
the medium up seriously at twenty-two, the basic information was still lurking there. 

I was living and painting in Spain when the incredible possibilities of what animation could do 
engulfed my mind. I planned my first film and took the money I had left from portrait painting 
to London.! starved for a bit, finally found work animating television commercials and man¬ 
aged to self-finance The Little island - a half-hour philosophical argument without words 
which won several international awards. 



The Little Island, 1958 


Three years later, when I'd finished the film, the unpleasant realisation slowly crept up on me 
that I really didn't know very much about animation articulation, that is, how to move the stuff. 
To train myself I traced off the animation that Ken Harris had done of a witch in a Bugs Bunny 
cartoon { Broomstick Bunny - 1955, directed by Chuck Jones). Doing this only confirmed how 
little I understood about movement. 

While I was making The Little island I had seen a re-release of Bambi , but since I'd considered 
myself a revolutionary in the field of animation, I’d rejected the film as conventional. But when I 
finished my film, i saw Bambi again, and almost crawled out of the theatre on my hands and knees. 
'How did they ever do that?' I'd learned just enough to realise that i really didn't know anything! 


1 










Animation master Ken Harris and wannabe, 1969 


So, how and where to get the expert knowledge? I was working in England as an independent 
and didn't want to go into the Hollywood cartoon mill, J wanted it both ways, I wanted my 
artistic freedom but I also wanted the knowledge. 

Preston Blair's How to Animate Film Cartoons was available, but because I was put off by the 
squashy-stretchy 1940s cartoon style, it was harder for me to grasp the underlying principles 
I was after - although it's a solid book and Preston was a very good animator from the 
Golden Age. It's ironic that forty years later I would become best known for my work on Who 
Framed Roger Rabbit - drawing in precisely the same style that had put me off learning from 
Preston. 

Much later, I was able to work with Ken Harris, the first 'real' master animator I met, and whose 
witch in Broomstick Bunny 1 had traced off. It's generally agreed that Ken Harris was the 
master animator at Warner Bros. Certainly he was director Chuck Jones’s lead man. 

In 1967,1 was able to bring Ken to England and my real education in animation articulation 
and performance started by working with him. I was pushing forty at the time and, with a 
large successful studio in London, I had been animating for eighteen years, winning over one 
hundred international awards. 


After seven or eight years of working closely with Ken, he said to me, ‘Hey Dick, you're start¬ 
ing to draw those things in the right place.' 


2 



'Yeah, I'm really learning it from you now, aren't l? r I said. 

'Yes,' he sard thoughtfully, 'you know . . . you could be an animator.' 

After the initial shock I realised he was right Ken was the real McCoy whereas I was just doing 
a lot of fancy drawings in various styles which were functional but didn't have the invisible 
'magic' ingredients to make them really live and perform convincingly. 

So I redoubled my efforts (mostly in mastering head and hand ‘accents') and the next year Ken 
pronounced, 'OK, you're an animator.' 

A couple of years after that, one day he said, 'Hey, Dick, you could be a good animator.' 

When he was eighty-two, I would go out to Ken's trailer home in Ohai, California and lay out 
scenes with him that he would later animate. He'd often take a half-hour nap and I'd keep 
working. 

One day he conked out for three hours and by the time he woke up, I had pretty much 
animated the scene. 'Sorry, Dick,' he said, 'you know ... I'm just so god-damned old.’ (long 
pause) 'Oh ... I see you've animated the scene .. 

'Yeah,' I said, 'I didn't know what else to do'. 

'Nice drawings ...' he said, then pointed. 'Hey, that's wrong! You've made a mistake.' And 
of course he was right. 

'Dammit Ken,' I said. 'I've worked with you for thirteen years and I still can't get your 
"thing". I'm afraid it's going to die with you.' 

'Ye-e-aaahhhhh . . .' he snickered, then said, 'Well, don't worry, you've your own pretty 
good thing going.' Then he snickered again. 

Ken was a very fast worker and I was always squeezing him for more and more footage and 
getting him to animate even when the taxi was ticking outside waiting for him to catch a plane 
home to the States. 

When he died in 1982 at eighty-three, my real regret was that when I was a pallbearer I 
didn't have the guts to tuck a blackwing pencil into his hand in his open coffin. He would have 
loved that. 

When I first started working with Ken, we had just completed the animation sequences which 
occur throughout Tony Richardson's epic film The Charge of the Light Brigade and I thought I 
was getting pretty proficient. When Ken saw it in the theatre he said, 'God, Dick, how did you 
guys ever do all that work?' (pause) "Course it doesn't move too good ...' 

But I'm still not ashamed of our work on that film. 

After that we went to see The Beatles' feature cartoon The Yellow Submarine . Though l liked 
the designer Heinz Edelman's styling, the 'start-stop, stop-start' jerky quality of most of the 
animation meant that after a half hour much of the audience went to the lobby. No matter how 
stylish or inventive - jerky or bumpy animation seems only to be able to hold the audience for 
about twenty-five minutes. While The Yellow Submarine had an enthusiastic cult following 
from the advertising agencies and university crowd, the general public avoided the film. It 
killed the non-Disney feature market for years. 


3 









My animated sequences from Tony Richardson's epic film, The Charge of the Light Brigade t 1968, 


4 































































































































A top United Artists executive who distributed The Yellow Submarine told me, 'This is the 
Beatles at the height of their popularity and still people stay away from non-Disney animation.' 
Film executives at that time always said of animation, ‘If it doesn't have the Disney name on it, 
no one will go see it' But the real point is, it wasn't just the Disney name - it was the Disney 
expertise that captivated the audience and held them for eighty minutes. 

Almost the same week Disney's The Jungle Book came out and was an instant hit. I went along 
to see it reluctantly, thinking (as I still considered myself an innovator) that though there might 
be something interesting, it was probably predictable stuff. 

That's how it started - with standard-issue wolves adopting the 'good housekeeping seal of 
approval' cutesy baby. I remember the boy Mowgli riding a black panther moving and acting in 
a cliched way - until he got off. And suddenly everything changed. The drawing changed. The 
proportions changed. The actions and acting changed. The panther helped the boy up a tree 
and everything moved to a superb level of entertainment. The action, the drawing, the per¬ 
formance, even the colours were exquisite. Then the snake appeared and tried to hypnotise the 
boy and the audience was entranced. I was astonished. 

The film continued at this high level, and when the tiger entered weighing eight hundred 
pounds and was both a tiger and the actor who did the voice (George Sanders), I realised I 
didn't even know how it was done - let alone ever be able to do it myself. I went back to my 
studio in shock and, through the night, I wrote a long fan letter. 

In those scenes I thought I had recognised the hand of the great Disney genius Milt Kahl, who 
Ken Harris had raved about. The first name on the directing animator's credits was Milt Kahl, so 
I assumed the work that stunned me had been Milt's. And it turned out that it was - except 
for one shot that was by Ollie Johnston. Johnston and Frank Thomas had done lots of other 
marvellous work in the picture. 

So I wrote to Milt saying that 1 thought The Jungle Book was the absolute high point of pure 
animation performance and that I didn't think it would ever be possible for anyone outside the 
Disney experience to reach that pinnacle. 

It turned out Milt said it was the best letter they ever had - and even better, that he knew my 
work a bit and wanted to meet me. 

Irrepressible ambition made me change my opinion that they alone could attain such heights; 
I figured, I think correctly, that given talent, experience, persistence - plus the knowledge of the 
experts - why should everything not be possible? 

I couldn't stand it any more. I had to know everything about the medium and master all aspects 
of it. Cap in hand, I made yearly visits to Milt and Frank Thomas, Ollie Johnston and Ken 
Anderson at Disney. 

One of the most important things Milt said was; 'Our animation differs from anyone else's 
because it is believable. Things have weight and the characters have muscles and we're giving 
the illusion of reality.' 


5 




Htolo finJMk Hwrmjmri 



A powerhouse of animation knowledge. From the left - Ken Harris, Grim Natwick and Art Babbitt, with students 
Richard Purdum and me outside my Soho Square studio in London* 1973. 


But how to make it believable? I didn't go there to drink Milt's bathwater or to find out what 
Frank Thomas had for breakfast. I would fire my carefully prepared list of questions at them and 
later write down everything they said. These wonderful virtuosos became my friends and were 
incredibly generous with their help. As Milt said, 'if you ask questions you find out what you 
want to know, if you're lucky enough to ask someone who knows.’ 


I was also fortunate enough to enlist the marvellous legendary animator Art Babbitt as a 
collaborator and teacher. Babbitt had developed Goofy and animated the Mushroom Dance 
in Fantasia. He 'dumped his kit’ of knowledge by giving several month-long in-house seminars 
as well as working with me in my London and Hollywood studios for several years. 


in 1973,1 hired the eighty-three-year-old - but still brilliant - Grim Natwick as a 'live-in' tutor in 
my London studio. Grim had made his name designing Betty Boop and animating most of Snow 
White herself in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. I also worked closely with Emery Hawkins 
who Ken Harris regarded as the most imaginative animator. Emery was wildly creative and rotat¬ 
ed in and out of every studio. I was also able to work for a short time with Abe Levitow, Gerry 
Chiniquy and Cliff Nordberg. Dick Huemer, one of the first New York pioneer animators, and later 
a key Disney story director {Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Dumbo, Fantasia and all the early 
Disney features) also gave me a very clear picture of the early days of animation. 


Most of them are gone now but this book is full of their accumulated knowledge and craft. 


6 















-r 



^ - 




^p i pi fl » ■ i i i'i mi hmj 




I scribbled this of Milt when he was lecturing us at my 
studio. Milt is saying, J Don't listen to Dick, he r s too 
technical,' 


Milt was always encouraging me to do my own personal 
more unconventional work, which he liked - but I 
wanted the knowledge first. 


Two geniuses at once tutor the author - Frank Thomas 
standing and Milt Kahl at the desk, early 1970s. 




If nf fiG? 




1 

1 


j 




Used by permission from Disney EnterpnSEt if 


7 




























































' i he Arthurian Legend' was a formidable professor who regarded the professional skills of the 
animator as being equivalent to those of a concert pianist 



1 ►! J- 

j 

tf 4 

5 i . 
1 ' !- . 

r f 

r 11 


Art in action; his first month long seminar at my London studio was like water in the desert for us„ 


8 

























In the three-day masterclasses I've been giving lately, some experienced professionals initially 
feel that we’re running over material that they're quite familiar with. Then about half way 
through the seminar things deepen and on the last day it all suddenly knits together. Some even 
describe it as an epiphany. Well, it sure was for me when I finally 'got it'. 

So please read the whole thing. 

Animation is just doing a lot of simple things - one at a time! A lot of really simple things 
strung together doing one part at a time in a sensible order. 

The movie actor, Scott Wilson sat through my three-day San Francisco masterclass. To my sur¬ 
prise he came up at the end and said, ‘Of course you realise, Dick, that this whole thing has 
been about acting.' 

I said, 'What?' and Scott said, ‘These are the exact equivalent methods, exercises and 
analyses we actors do in our acting workshops.' 

So acting is intrinsically part of the whole. And if you can't draw or articulate movement 
how are you ever going to do the acting? 

Someone once asked Milt Kahl: 'How did you plan out the counteraction you used on that 
character?' 

Milt blew up: 'That's the wrong way to look at it! Don’t think of it like that! I just concen¬ 
trate on giving the performance - that's what's important! The play's the thing. You'll get ail 
tangled up if you think of it in a technical way!' 

Of course he's right. If a musician knows his scales, he can concentrate on giving the perform¬ 
ance and bringing out the ideas inherent in the music.But if he constantly has to think of the 
mechanics of what he's doing - then he can hardly play. 

Therefore, if we know and understand all the basics - then we've got the tools to create. 
Only then we can give the performance! 


This book is an anatomy course in animation. Just like an anatomy course in life drawing, it 
shows you how things are put together and how they work. This knowledge frees you to do 
your own expression. 

It takes time. I didn't encounter Ken Harris until I was nearly forty and he was sixty-nine. I had 
to hire most of my teachers in order to learn from them. 

f hired Ken in order to get below him and be his assistant, so I was both his director and his 
assistant. I don't know if this is original, but I finally figured out that to learn or to 'understand' f 
had to 'stand under' the one who knows in order to catch the drippings of his experience. 

There's a tale about a decrepit old Zen master wrestler. A very fit and brilliant young wrestler 
begs the old master to take him on and show him the master's ninety-nine tricks. 

The old man says, 'Look at me, I'm old and decrepit and I'm not interested.' 

The young man keeps pestering the old man who says, 'Look, son, I'm fragile now and 
when I show you the ninety-nine tricks, you’ll challenge me, they always do - and look at 
me, you'll make mincemeat of me.' 


9 





The Charge of the Light Brigade, 1968 


‘Please, oh please, master,' pleads the powerful young man. 'I promise I will never chal¬ 
lenge you! Oh please teach me the ninety-nine tricks.' 

So reluctantly the old man teaches him until the young man has mastered the ninety-nine 
tricks. The young man becomes a famous wrestfer and one day takes his master into a room, 
locks the door and challenges him. 

The old man says, 'I knew you'd do this - that's why I didn’t want to teach you in the first 
place.' 

'Come on, old man, there's just me and you in here,' says the young one, 'Let’s see what 
you're made of.' 

They start and right away the old man throws the young fellow out of the window. The 
crumpled-up young man moans up from the street below, 'You didn't show me that one!' 

'That was number one hundred,' says the old man. 

This book is the ninety-nine tricks. The hundredth trick is called talent. 

I became a repository for various strands of animation lore and I've taken all this stuff and given 
it my own twist. The goaf here is to master the mechanics in order to do new things. Get the 
mechanics into your bloodstream so they just become second nature and you don't have to 
think about them and can concentrate on giving the performance. 

I remember once saying to Emery Hawkins (a wonderful, unsung animator), Tm afraid my 
brains are in my hand.' 

Emery said, 'Where else would they be? It's a language of drawing. It’s not a language of 
tongue.’ 

So everything I know about animation that I can put into words, scribbles and drawings is here 
in this book. 


10 


































































































































DRAWING IN TIME 

Why animate? Everyone knows it's a lot of hard work doing all those drawings and positions. 
So what's the hook? Why do it? 

Answer: Our work is taking place in time. We've taken our 'stills' and leapt into another 
dimension. 

Drawings that walk : seeing a series of images we've made spring to life and start walking 
around is already fascinating. 

Drawings that walk and talk: seeing a series of our drawings talking is a very startling expe¬ 
rience. 

Drawings that walk and talk and think: seeing a series of images we’ve done actually go 
through a thinking process - and appear to be thinking - is the real aphrodisiac. Plus creating 
something that is unique, which has never been done before is endlessly fascinating. 

We've always been trying to make the pictures move, the idea of animation is aeons older than 
the movies or television. Here's a quick history: 



Over 35,000 years ago, we were painting animals on cave walls, sometimes drawing four pairs 
of legs to show motion. 


11 




In 1600 BC the Egyptian Pharaoh Rameses II built a temple to the goddess Isis which had 110 
columns. Ingeniously, each column had a painted figure of the goddess in a progressively 
changed position. To horsemen or charioteers riding past - Isis appeared to move! 



The Ancient Greeks sometimes decorated pots with figures in successive stages of action. 
Spinning the pot would create a sense of motion. 



As far as we know, the first attempt to project drawings onto a wall was made in 1640 by 
Athonasius Kircher with his 'Magic Lantern'. 

12 , 















Kircher drew each figure on separate pieces of glass which he placed in his apparatus and pro¬ 
jected on a wall. Then he moved the glass with strings, from above. One of these showed a 
sleeping man's head and a mouse. The man opened and dosed his mouth and when his mouth 
was. open the mouse ran in. 

Although photography was discovered as early as the 1830s, most new devices for creating an 
illusion of movement were made using drawings, not photos. 

In 1824 Peter Mark Roget discovered (or rediscovered, since it was known in classical times) 
the vital principle, 'the persistence of vision'. This principle rests on the fact that our eyes 
temporarily retain the image of anything they've just seen. If this wasn't so, we would never 
get the illusion of an unbroken connection in a series of images, and neither movies nor ani¬ 
mation would be possible. Many people don't realise that movies don't actually move, and that 
they are still images that appear to move when they are projected in a series. 

Roget's principle quickly gave birth to various optical contraptions: 



The Thaumatrope: A cardboard disc mounted on a top - or held between two pieces of string. 
A birdcage drawing is on one side and a bird on the other. When the top is spun or the strings 
are pulled the disc twirls, the images merge and the bird seems to be in the cage. 




The Phenakistoscope: Two discs mounted on a shaft - the front disc has slits around the edge 
and the rear disc has a sequence of drawings. Align the drawings with the slits, look through 
the openings and as the discs revolve we have the illusion of motion. 


13 


1 




The 'Wheel of Life' (or the Zoetrope): Appeared in the USA in 1867 and was sold as a toy. Long 
strips of paper with a sequence of drawings on them were inserted into a cylinder with slits in 
it. Spin the cylinder, look through the slits and the creature appears to move. 


The Praxi noscope: Devised by the Frenchman Emile Reynaud in 1877. He was the first to create 
short sequences of dramatic action by drawing on a 30 foot strip of transparent substance 
called Xrystaloid'. This opened the way for the tremendous advances to come. 



The Flipper book: In 1868 a novelty called 'the flipper book' appeared worldwide and it 
remained the simplest and most popular device. It's just a pad of drawings bound like a book 
along one edge. Hold the book in one hand along the bound edge and with the other hand flip 
the pages and 'see 'em move*. The result is animation - the illusion of continuous action. 
Drawings in time. 



14 





This is the same as school kids making drawings in the corners of their math books and flipping 
the pages. 



Today the 'classical' animator still flips his drawings the same way as a flipper book before 
testing it on the video or film camera. He places the drawings in sequence, with the low num¬ 
bers on the bottom, then flips through the action from the bottom up. Eventually he should get 
good enough at it to approximate actual screen time and spot any errors or drawings that need 
altering. Now that we have the video camera with its instant playback of the drawings at film 
speed, not everyone learns to flip. 




( 


i 



\ 


\ 


_ -J 


In 1896 a New York newspaper cartoonist James Stuart Blackton interviewed the inventor 
Thomas Edison who was experimenting with moving pictures. Blackton did some sketches of 
Edison, who was impressed by Blackton's speed and drawing facility and asked him to do some 
drawings in a series. Later, Edison photographed these - the first combination of drawings and 
photography. In 1906 they publicly released Humorous Phases of Funny Faces. A man puffed a 
cigar and blew smoke rings at his girl friend, she rolled her eyes, a dog jumped through a hoop 
and a juggler performed. Blackton used about 3000 'flickering drawings' to make this first ani¬ 
mated picture - the forefather of the animated cartoon. The novelty brought explosions of 
laughter and was an instant hit. 


15 




A year later Emile Cohl made and showed his first animated film at the Follies Bergeres in Paris. 
The figures were childlike - white lines on black - but the story was relatively sophisticated: a 
tale of a girl, a jealous lover and a policeman. He also gave lampposts and houses intelligence 
and movement, with emotions and moods of their own. Cohl's work prefigures the later ani¬ 
mation dictum, 'Don’t do what a camera can do - do what a camera can't do!' 

Winsor McCay, brilliant creator of the popular comic strip Little Nemo in Siumberland, was the 
first man to try to develop animation as an art form. Inspired by his young son bringing home 
some flipper books, he made 4000 drawings of 'Little Nemo’ move. These were a big hit when 
flashed on the screen at Hammerstein’s theatre in New York in 1911. 

As another experiment he drew a bizarre short film, How a Mosquito Operates, which was also 
enthusiastically received. 


■ . / £ 

I miMM 


^ _ , 

/jf 7 *- / i- / 

wf r 

■ - 



mm 

m 


Then in 1914 McCay drew Gertie the Dinosaur and McCay himself performed 'live' in front of 
the projected animation, holding an apple In front of Gertie and inviting her to eat. Gertie 
lowered her long neck and swallowed the fruit - astounding the audience. This was the first 
'personality' animation - the beginnings of cartoon individuality. It was so lifelike that the 
audience could identify with Gertie. It was a sensation. 


16 

















In McCay's words: 'I went into the business and spent thousands of dollars developing this 
new art. It required considerable time, patience and careful thought - timing and drawing the 
pictures [my italics]. This is the most fascinating work I have ever done - this business of 
making animated cartoons live on the screen.' 



„ v 

McCay also made the first serious dramatic cartoon, The Sinking of the Lusitania , in 1918. 
A war propaganda film expressing outrage at the catastrophe, it was a huge step forward in 
realism and drama - the longest animated film so far. It took two years of work and needed 
25,000 drawings. 

Later, as an older man being celebrated by the younger funny-cartoon animators in the busi¬ 
ness, McCay lashed out at them saying that he had developed and given them a great new art 
form which they had cheapened and turned into a crude money-making business done by hack 
artists. 

i- 

This well defines the endlessly uncomfortable relationship between the pioneering artist/ide¬ 
alist and the animation industry - working to comfortable and predictable formulas. 

Still doth the battle rage ... 

In the twenties Felix the cat became as popular as Charlie Chaplin. These short Felix cartoons 
were visually inventive, doing what a camera can't do. But more importantly a real personality 
emerged from this flurry of silent, black and white drawings and Felix 'himself' connected with 
audiences worldwide. 

The Felix cartoons led straight to the arrival of Walt Disney, and in 1928, Mickey Mouse took 
off with his appearance in Steamboat Willie - the first cartoon with synchronised sound. 


17 




I 


fj 

£ 

•ji 

& 

■*_ 

hu 

£ 
s= 
!_ 




The brilliant Ward Kimball, who animated Jiminy Cricket in Pinocchio and the crows in 
Dumbo, once told me, ’You can have no idea of the impact that having these drawings suddenly 
speak and make noises had on audiences at that time. People went crazy over it/ 



Disney followed Steamboat Willie with The Skeleton Dance. For the first time, action was co¬ 
ordinated with a proper musical score. This was the first Siiiy Symphony. Ub Iwerks was chief 
animator on both films and a lot of the sophisticated action of The Skeleton Dance still holds 
up today. 



Disney leapt forward again in 1932 with Flowers and Trees - the first full colour cartoon. 


18 































£ 

E 

v 

B- 

s 

s* 

£ 

a 

* 


Then he followed it one year later with Three Little Pigs . This had a major impact because of its 
fully developed ‘personality' animation - clearly defined and believable separate personalities 
acting so convincingly that the audience could identify with and root for them. Another first. 








■Wrtitll. . 




mm 


m 






Tt'-VSgffl 
. . 




’ ■ 


WUi'.WVi 

> . i - . . 


& 






M 








■VV-V'" 

mm 


f-mm 


l.'v’i 


I) 


. Vi.Hl 






V:. 


i.l’. I't* 


■j ■ 






HK 




A: 


"ll 




f * jfi w,yW» 

’ - ■ A•' *i^.1 

•.. I' 1 • \ i ■ iIj t .~t ■ y SHw 


V V'^r r 

SH&sl 
IH 

' ■' .,^3 






fl®,’ AH i .• -. ■: < 






; . 

■ . ■<. ■ ■ ■ • 


PWfo 1 . 


- 4 • t 1 j ... T'"V.iT«iT\ l* *"*vi«T> 






L*L. 

lv-». n »*• . 

1 ,• * ' v .. '• ' i K-z£ j &±' : a 

j?v : • v.’Ti'V-wS'^-tfvj 




*■ ViVfrj.ftVft IfofllL4< ,i‘ 

.... . ... ;• 












r> 



Astonishingly, oniy four years after that, Disney released Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, 
the world's first fully-animated feature-length film, raising cartoon drawings to the level of 
art and holding the audience spellbound for eighty-three minutes, A truly staggering feat 
accomplished in an incredibly short space of time. (It's said that many of the artists booked 
themselves in advance Into hospital to recover from the effort of completing the film.) 


The tremendous financial and critical success of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs became the 
foundation of Disney's output and gave birth to the 'Golden Age’ of animation: Pinocchio, 
Dumbo, Bambi and Fantasia, as well as the Silly Symphonies and Donald Duck and Mickey 
Mouse shorts. 


19 

















































Surrounding the potent Disney centre were the satellite studios: Max Fleischer with two fea¬ 
tures - Gulliver's Travels and Mr Bug Goes to Town - and Popeye shorts; Warner Bros' Looney 
Tunes and Merrie Melodies with Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Porky Pig; MGM with Tom and Jerry, 
Droopy and the great anarchic Tex Avery shorts, and Walter Lantz with Woody Woodpecker. 
Fed as they were by the knowledge and expertise emanating from the Disney training centre, 
their much wilder humour was often in reaction to or in rebellion against Disney 'realism' and 
'believability'. 

But after the Second World War the situation changed. 

The arrival of television and its voracious appetite for rapidly produced product demanded sim¬ 
pler and cruder work. 1950s stylisation gave birth to UPA studios in Hollywood who created 
Mr. Magoo and Gerald McBoing Boing. UPA's approach was regarded as more graphically 
sophisticated than Disney and used more 'limited' and much less realistic animation. At the 
same time there was a worldwide flourishing of personal, experimental and 'art house* ani¬ 
mated films made in new ways with many different techniques and with very different content 
to the Hollywood product Animators were reinventing the wheel stylistically but were ignorant 
of the structural knowledge developed in Hollywood's Golden Age. 

This knowledge, though residing in the hands of the originators, was generally ignored as 
being ‘old hat' or was forgotten in the following thirty years. 

However, in the last few years, the renaissance of animation as a form of mass entertainment 
is giving rebirth to the old knowledge. The startlingly successful innovations of computer ani¬ 
mation are helping to transform animation in all it's multi-faceted forms into a major part of the 
entertainment mainstream. Alongside this, there is also the explosion in the computer games 
industry. 

If drawn 'classical' animation is an extension of drawing, then computer animation can be seen 
as an extension of puppetry - high tech marionettes. Both share the same problems of how to 
give a performance with movement, weight, timing and empathy. 

The old knowledge applies to any style or approach to the medium no matter what the 
advances in technology. Most of the work methods and devices in this book were developed 
and refined in the Hollywood animation studios between 1930-1940. 

I've co-ordinated what I've learnt from various approaches and I’m presenting it here in a form 
based on my own experience in this medium - with its limitless possibilities of imagination. 

Emery Hawkins said to me, 'The only limitation in animation is the person doing it. Otherwise 
there is no limit to what you can do. And why shouldn't you do it?’ 







t meticulously painted this poster for the 1981 London Film Festival, Everybody said, l Oh , I didn't know you die! collage/ 


21 
















.USE® 







22 































TIME TO DRAW 


This section is really for classical animators. However, I haven't been surprised to find that most 
of the leading computer animators draw rather well, so it may be interesting to them too. It 
certainly helps enormously to be able to put down your ideas - even in stick figures. For the 
classical animator it is crucial. 

Drawing should become second nature, so that the animator can concentrate on the actual 
actions and the timing of them and give the performance life. 

When you're doing cartoons all the time, it's very easy to slide into formula drawing. During 
the making of Who Framed Roger Rabbit I found this pinned up on our notice board: 


Fb w ^ FCl ^ A 
Cjo rMc “R-a & s t' 5 ; 

■ ^"H{5 Ro fL 

co*A\C 

pAiC>, 

So lAJ TH£ fWb 
£-0HLt> /JDT 

fe.A<S»tC- rtA&lTS 

CoMic. 

\TJ AA A * 


Life drawing is the antidote to this. 




When you're doing life drawing, you're all alone. One of the main reasons animators - once 
they become animators - don't like to spend their evenings and spare time life drawing is 
because it's not a collaborative operation. 

Animation is usually a group effort, and one has the stimulus of constant interaction, both 
competitive and co-operative, with the cut and thrust, highs and lows, political factions of 
complaint and inspiration, all the tensions and anxieties, rewards and excitement of group 
production. 


23 






With life drawing there's no one to admire your efforts - rather the reverse. It's always shocking 
to find you're not as advanced or skilled as you thought you were, and since it's about the hard¬ 
est thing to do with no rewards other than the thing itself - it's no wonder few do it or stick at ft 

Most animators are exhausted at the end of a day's work and have families to go to. Also, one 
has to do a lot of life drawing to get anywhere - not just a bit at a time here and there. 

But the fact remains that there is no replacement for the hard work of solid life drawing. 

There is one payoff and it is substantial - the gradual and fundamental improvement of all 
one's work. 

Winsor McCay once said: 'If I were starting over again, the first thing I'd do would be to make 
a thorough study of draftsmanship. I would learn perspective, then the human figure, both 
nude and clothed, and surround it with proper setting.' 

And Milt Kahl said: ‘I don't think it's possible to be a top notch animator without being an 
excellent draftsman. You have to try for the whole thing, you know, got to know the figure. 
Know the figure well enough so that you can concentrate on the particular person - on the 
difference - why this person is different from somebody else. The ability to draw and be able 
to turn things and the ability, the knowledge that enables you to caricature and to exaggerate 
in the right direction and emphasise the difference between things is what you’re doing all the 
time. Any time you're doing a strong drawing of anything well, your drawing is strong because 
you're depicting why this is different from something else. You need that figure-drawing back¬ 
ground in order to sharpen. Every animator should have this background and unfortunately 
they don't! You just can't know too much, if you're going to lampoon something, or do a satire 
- you have to understand the straight way. It gives you a jumping-off point, it gives you a 
contrast. You just do it and do it... and do it!' 


24 







Art Babbitt is blunter: ‘If you can't draw - forget it. You're an actor without arms and legs.' 

But we can learn to draw. There's the myth that you are either a born draftsman or not. Wrong! 
Obviously, natural talent is a great help and the desire is essential, but drawing can be taught 
and drawing can be learnt. Its best to have done a ton of it at art school to get the foundation 
in early. But it can be done at any time. Just do it. 

Here are three pieces of drawing advice that were given to me - and which stuck. 

When I was fifteen years old and really keen on being an animator, I took a five day-and-night 
bus trip from Toronto to Los Angeles, and walked up and down outside the Disney Studio fence 
for days hoping to get inside. Finally an advertising friend of my mother’s saw my drawings and 
rang up the Disney PR department, and they took me into the Studio for two days; they were 
very kind to me and even did a press story on me. 

It was there that I received my first piece of great advice. Richard Kelsey (Disney story artist and 
designer/illustrator) said, 'First of all, kid, learn to draw. You can always do the animation stuff 
later.' 

> 

I desperately wanted to become an animator and I produced my sketches of Disney characters, 
which were kind of at the Roger Rabbit level since I was a precocious little bastard. Dick Kelsey 
looked at them and said, 'Yes, but I mean really iearn to draw.' 



25 






rz <e se\ .yith eager beaver. Disney studios, 1948, My commercial work, age 17. 


Weeks later when I was getting on the bus to go home to Toronto, I rang Dick up and asked 
again, 'What do you think ! should do?' - 'Learn to draw!’ he said. 

One great regret I have in my life is that forty years later, when I was animation director on 
Who Framed Roger Rabbit, I saw Dick in the Disney canteen out of the corner of my eye, but I 
was so caught up in the production politics I didn't break away to go over and thank him. I 
never had another chance. 

After my trip I went straight to art school and received the second piece of advice, from a great 
teacher and superb draftsman, Eric Freifield, then teaching at the Ontario College of Art. He 
looked at my life drawings and said, 'Well, here's a clever little fellow who’s never seen any¬ 
thing.' I said, 'What should I do?' He said, ‘Go to the library and look at Albrecht Diirer for two 
years.' I did. And not surprisingly my interest in animation vanished for years. 

I paid my way through art school by knocking off Disneyesque dog food ads like the one 
above - at the same time doing 'realismo social' like this lithograph of a revival meeting 
‘Where the healing waters flow'. 

After that I lived in Spain for a couple of years doing paintings like these until a totally 
unexpected affliction by the animation bug got me. Forty years later a top executive on Who 
Framed Roger Rabbit kept referring to me as 'artsy craftsy' or ‘artsy fartsy'. How did he ever 
know? He must have smelt it as there was no sign of it in my animation. 


26 





■ 




liyuii 





■ if 

fm 4:: i ■ 9 

SEN 


27 































































The third piece of drawing advice came many years later - I was fifty - when I was pretty 
accomplished, and it came from a much younger man. My talent is primarily 'linear', which 
makes cartooning easy. However, since animators have to enclose their shapes, there is a ten- 

■t 

dency to end up just drawing outlines - like colouring-book figures. In other words, animators 
don’t usually draw from the inside-out, like a sculptor does. Sculpture had been my weakest 
subject - although I'd done a lot of life drawing and had a grounding in basic anatomy. 

John Watkiss - then a twenty-three-year-old, self-taught, brilliant draftsman and anatomist - 
held his own life drawing classes in London. (Recently he was one of the principle designers of 
Disney's Tarzan.) I used to hire John periodically to do presentation artwork and we were 
friendly. I went to John's evening life classes for a while and one day John, who is ruthlessly 
honest, pointed to my drawing and said, 'Hey! You missed a stager I felt like a butterfly pinned 
to the wall. He was right I knew exactly what he meant. I was weak from a sculptural point of 
view. I was too linear. 

Years later, when I had dropped out of the 'industry' part of animation, I re-studied my anato¬ 
my and worked on drawing from the inside-out. 1 advanced backwards and filled in the 
missing stage. 


28 













I showed my ex-illustrator mother several of these life drawings when she was bed-bound just 
before she died. I've been working at reconstituting myself, Mom, doing all these drawings.' 
She looked at them carefully for some time, then said, 'Very nice, very nice . .. Nothing new.’ 
Advice from the inside - from one’s family - somehow doesn't have the same impact as from 
the outside. However my mother had once said, ‘When you go to art school, you’ll find every¬ 
body sitting around practising how to do their signature,' and sure enough, there they were, 
some of them doing just that. 

She also gave me this great advice: ‘Don't try to develop a style. Ignore style. Just concen¬ 
trate on the drawing and style will just occur.' 

Of course there's an opposing view to all of this 'you've got to learn to draw' stuff. 

The great Tex Avery, master of animation's ability to do the impossible and make the unreal 
spring to life - and the first director of Bugs Bunny and Elmer Fudd - said: 

‘I was never too great an artist. I realised there at Lantz’s that most of those fellows could 
draw rings around me ... i thought. Brother! Why fight it? i'll never make it! Go the other 
route. And I'm glad I did. My goodness, I've enjoyed that a lot more than I would have 
enjoyed just animating scenes all my life.' 


29 









Tex stopped animating and became a great, original and innovative director. The biographer 
John Canemaker said: 'While Disney in the 1930s was trying to convince the audience of the 
“reality" of his characters in his film world, by creating his “illusion of life", Tex went in the 
opposite direction, celebrating the cartoon as cartoon, exploring the medium's potential for 
surrealism.' He never let audiences forget they were watching an animated film. 

Tex had a twenty-year run with his wildly funny approach to the medium, but he found it 
impossible to sustain. 'I'm burned out,' he said. His colleague, animator Mike Lah said, 'He 
didn't have any more space. He used it up.' 

1 love Tex Avery's cartoons - his drawings and character designs. His Droopy is my favourite 
cartoon character. One of the nice things about doing Who Framed Roger Rabbit was to emu¬ 
late Tex Avery's humour - 'But not so brutal!' were my instructions. Though, as Milt said, 'You 
have to try to have the whole thing.’ 

I am convinced that if an animator's drawing foundation is strong, he will have the versatility 
to go in all the different directions possible at his fingertips. He'll be able to draw anything - 
from the most difficult, realistic characters, to the most wild and wacky. And it's not likely he'll 
exhaust his resources and suffer burn-out. 

Because of his strong drawing ability, Milt Kahl was usually saddled with animating 'the Prince' 
or Disney's 'straighter' characters - which of course are the hardest ones to do. Whenever any¬ 
one criticised his work, he'd say, 'OK, you can do the Prince.' And they'd soon vanish. 

Word spread among the more 'cartoony' artists that, 'Milt draws beautifully but he can only do 
the straight stuff and he can't handle zany stuff at all.' Then, between features. Milt animated 
most of Tiger Trouble, a 'Goofy' short. Everybody shut up, and stayed shut up. His work is a 
classic of broad and crazy animation. 

'If you can draw funny that's enough' is an animation myth that's been around a long time, and 
still seems to persist. This is because a few of the early animators lacked sophisticated drawing 
skills - but nevertheless were very inventive and excellent at getting the essence of the drama 
and performance. 

The myth was that all they needed was to have a good draftsman as an assistant to do the final 
drawings and everything would be fine. But in the mid thirties, when the new wave of young 
animators with better drawing skills came on the scene and learned from the old guys, the 
ground was soon littered with out-of work animators who could only handle the cruder car¬ 
toons. The new breed of better draftsmen took their jobs away from them. If the present boom 
in this medium ever contracts it's certain that the more skilled artists will be the survivors. 

Bill Tytia - famous for his animation of Stromboli in Pinocchio, the Devil in 'Night on Bald 
Mountain' from Fantasia , and Dumbo with his mother - once said: 'At times you will have to 
animate stuff where you can’t just be cute and coy. Those are the times when you’ll have to 
know something about drawing. Whether It's called form or force or vitality, you must get it 
into your work, for that will be what you feel, and drawing is your means of expressing it.' 


30 






■. fc-lWl 




rT^-.r 









Obviously all this doesn't apply so much to computer animators since the 'maquette' of the 
character is already planted inside the machine, ready to be manipulated. But since most of the 
leading computer animators draw rather well, many work out their positions in small sketches, 
and, of course, the planning, layout and story artists and designers draw exactly the same as 
their classical equivalents. 

I had an unnerving experience in Canada when a friend asked me to give a one-hour address to 
a large high school gathering of computer animation students. They had a very impressive 
set-up of expensive computers but, from what I could see of their work, none of them seemed 
to have any idea of drawing at all. During my talk I stressed the importance of drawing and the 
great shortage of good draftsmen. 

A laid-back greybeard professor interrupted to inform me, 'What do you mean? All of us 
here draw very well.' 

Words failed me. 

At the end of the talk, I showed them how to do a basic walk, and as a result got mobbed 
at the exit, the kids pleading desperately for me to teach them more, i escaped, but I’m afraid 
that's what the situation is out there - a lack of any formal training and no one to pass on the 
‘knowledge'. 

You don't know what you don't know. 

One of the problems rampant today is that, in the late 1960s, realistic drawing generally 
became considered unfashionable by the art world, and no one bothered to learn how to do it 
any more. 

The Slade school in London used to be world-famous for turning out fine British draftsmen. A 
distinguished British painter who taught at the Slade asked me, 'How did you learn how to do 
animation?' I answered that I was lucky enough to have done a lot of life drawing at art school, 
so without realizing it i got the feeling for weight which is so vital to animation. 

Then I said, 'What am I telling you for? You're teaching at the Slade and it's famous for its 
life drawing and excellent draftsmen.' 

'If the students want to do that,' he said, 'then they've got to club together and hire them¬ 
selves a model and do it in their own home.' At first i thought he was joking - but no! Life 
drawing as a subject went out years ago. It wasn't even on the curriculum! 

! had a boyhood friend who became a bigwig in art education circles. He ran international 
conferences of the arts. About sixteen years ago he invited me to Amsterdam to a conference 
of the deans of the leading American art colleges. He knew me well enough to know I was 
bound to say controversial things, so I was invited as his wild card. 

in my talk 1 found myself lamenting the lack of trained, talented artists and that I was ham¬ 
pered in my own studio's work because I couldn't find trained disciplined artists to hire. The 
applicants' portfolios were full of textures, abstract collages, scribbles, often nude photos of 
themselves and friends. No real drawing. I didn't realise how strongly I felt about this and as I 
talked I found myself nearly in tears. 


32 




My advertising campaign design for Mike Nichols' The Graduate. A foundation of life drawing was invaluable 
when I had to draw this simple teg for this movie logo. 


r 

f . ■ B 

f -■ 

L ■ ■ ■ 

k 

1 * K B 


[. j : j. Kh: : k B 

■ ->K 

[ i j|pi : 

jK : 


9 


r. i i 

1 r- ? : 

1 ■ 

B B 

B 

3H 

:■ iHI 


T :■ | 

■ 

■ 

a i 

B 

B 

raCBBH 

B S 

-! f I | 1 

■ 

j t • J 















I harangued the deans of the art schools for failing in their duty to provide proper skills to their 
students. Surprisingly, when I finished, the deans called an emergency meeting to which 1 was 
invited. 'Look Mr. Williams,' they said, ‘you're right, but we have two problems. Number one: 
since classical drawing was rejected years ago, we have no trained teachers who can draw or 
teach conventional drawing as they never learned it themselves. And number two: our mostly 
rich students - on whom we count for our funding - don’t want to learn to draw. They would 
rather decorate themselves as living works of art - and that’s exactly what they do.' 

So I said, 'Look, all I know is that I can't find people to hire or train; but otherwise I don't know 
what you can do.' 

They said, 'Neither do we.' 

Lately things have improved somewhat. So-called classical drawing seems to be coming back, 
but with a hyper-realistic photographic approach because skilled artists are thin on the ground. 
Shading isn't drawing, and it isn't realism. 

Good drawing is not copying the surface. It has to do with understanding and expression. We 
don't want to learn to draw just to end up being imprisoned in showing off our knowledge of 
joints and muscles. We want to get the kind of reality that a camera can't get. We want to 
accentuate and suppress aspects of the model’s character to make it more vivid. And we want 
to develop the co-ordination to be able to get our brains down into the end of our pencil. 

Many cartoonists and animators say that the very reason they do cartoons is to get away from 
realism and the realistic world into the free realms of the imagination. They'll correctly point 
out that most cartoon animals don't look like animals - they're designs, mental constructs. 
Mickey ain’t no mouse, Sylvester ain't no cat. They look more like circus clowns than animals, 
Frank Thomas always says: 'If you saw Lady and the Tramp walking down the road, there's no 
way that you are going to buy that they're real dogs.' 

But to make these designs work, the movements have to be believable - which leads back to 
realism and real actions, which leads back to studying the human or animal figure to under¬ 
stand its structure and movement. What we want to achieve isn't realism, it's believabiiity. 

While Tex Avery released the animator from the more literal approach in order to do the impos¬ 
sible, he was only able to do it so successfully because his animation was mostly done by 
Disney drop-outs who already had 'the Disney knowledge' of articulation, weight, etc. So, 
ironically, his rebellion, his ‘going the other route', had its basis in an underlying knowledge of 
realism. 

But don't confuse a drawing with a map! We're animating masses, not lines .So we have to 
understand how mass works in reality. In order to depart from reality, our work has to be based 
on reality. 


i 


34 




[T'S ALL IN THE TIMING AND THE SPACING 


I met Grim Natwick {born Myron Nordveig) in a Hollywood basement when he was in his 
eighties. Grim was the oldest of the great animators, being already in his forties when he 
animated eighty-three scenes of Snow White in Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. 
Previously, he'd designed Betty Boop for Max Fleischer, for which he received nothing and was 
furious about it ‘til the day he died, aged 100. 

I'll never forget the image of this big Norwegian American sitting in the golden twilight, 
extending his long arms and spatula hands saying ... 


! A 'A -A- ANIMATION IT'S. .A-A-AU- 



■ A-A-AIVP /Al■ • • 

Lorn pauseY.. 


IN THE TIMING 
THE SPACING-. 

.. STZAY-y-Y- N-NO £.■■■ THAT THE 

AMFP\CAUG . WERE the opes 

TO WORK THIS OUT.. 




35 



















The bouncing ball says it all. 

The old bouncing-ball example is often used because it shows so many different aspects of 
animation. 

A ball bounces along. 



and where it hits - the 'boinks' - that's the timing. The impacts - where the ball is hitting the 
ground - that's the timing of the action, the rhythm of where things happen, where the 'accents' 
or 'beats' or 'hits' happen. 

And here's the spacing. 



The ball overlaps itself when it’s at the stow part of its arc, but when it drops fast, it's spaced 
further apart. That's the spacing. The spacing is how close or far apart those clusters are. That's 
it. It's simple, but it's important. The spacing is the tricky part. Good animation spacing is a rare 
commodity. 


36 






So we have: 



The two basic elements of animation. 

To experience this, take a coin and film it in stages under a video camera. 



First plot out the timing -where you want the ball to hit the ground. Then push the coin around 
- taking a picture at each frame - and see what looks right or wrong. Try it with different 
timings and spacing. You're already animating. You're already dealing with the important 
fundamentals and you haven't even made a single drawing. You're doing pure animation 
without any drawings. 


37 






Hidden in this simple test is the weight of the ball - how it feels, light or heavy; what it's 
made of, Is it large or small, moving fast or slow? This will all emerge if you do several tests 

- which only take a few minutes to do. The importance of the timing and the spacing will 
become obvious. 

Because you did it, a certain amount of personality will creep into the action - whether the ball 
is deliberate, slow, jaunty, erratic, cautious, even optimistic or pessimistic. 

And all this, before you've made a single drawing. This reveals how important and dominant 
the timing and the spacing is. Even if the ball positions were drawn in detail by Michelangelo 
or Leonardo da Vinci, the timing and the spacing of the drawings will still dominate. 

Another interesting way to experience the difference between timing and spacing right away 
is this: 

Let's put a coin under the video camera and move it across the page (or screen) in one second 

- 24 frames of screen time. That's our timing. 

We'll space it out evenly - and that's our spacing. 



-ctP 


T 

7 


JS. 

MJPPt-E 


J 


| 

f 

! 


( 


HOlP 


Now we'll keep the same timing - again taking one second for the coin to move across the 
page. But we'll change the spacing by slowly easing out of position number 1 and easing grad¬ 
ually into position number 25. 



HOH> MlPTH-E HOt- P 


It still takes one second for the coin to get over there. It has the same timing - but there is very 
different movement because of the different spacing. Both start together - and both hit the 
middle together - but the spacing is quite different. And so the action is very different. 


38 





















































You could say that animation is the art of timing. But you could say that about all motion 
pictures. 

The most brilliant masters of timing were the silent comedians: Charlie Chaplin, Buster 
Keaton, Laurel and Hardy. 

Certainly for a film director, timing is the most important thing. For an animator, it's only half 
the battle. We need the spacing as well. We can have a natural feel for timing, but we have to 
learn the spacing of things. 

One other thing: The bouncing ball example is often used to show animation ‘squash and 
stretch' - that is, the ball elongates as it falls, flattens on impact with the ground and then 
returns to its normal shape In the slower part of Its arc. 

It might squash and stretch this way if it was a very soft ball with not much air in it, but what 



I've found is that you can get a good enough effect with a rigid coin - provided the spacing of 
it was right - so this added technique is not always necessary. Certainly a hard golf ball isn't 
going to bend all over the place. In other words, if you do this squishy squashy thing too much, 
everything comes out a bit 'spioopy', like it's made of rubber. Life ain't like that. At least most 
of it ain't. More about this later. 



Golf ball bounce, 1951 

Having established all this, let's go to lesson one: 


39 



















































Stills from Charles Dickens 1 A Christmas Carol. 1972. We re starting to get better. J got my first Oscar for this half- 
hour film made originally for TV. You wouldn't think a lot of this was drawn by Bugs Bunny animators! ft couldn't 
have been done without Ken Harris who carried the load on Scrooge. Towards the end, Chuck Jones (the Executive 
Producer) lent us Abe Lev tow. a great unsung animator with majestic qualities. We also had help from Disney alumni 
George Nicholas and Hal Arnbro. My own stalwarts were Richard Purdum, Sergio Simon ettl and Roy Naisbitt, 


40 















































































































LESSON ONE 


UNPLUG! 

Unplug! Take off your head phones! Turn off the radio! Switch off the CD! Turn off the tape! 
Close the door. 

Like many artists, E had the habit of listening to classical music or jazz while working. On one 
of my first visits to Milt Kahl I innocently asked; 


MU-T, PO yOU Li STEW TO 

classical m us ic m YOU'RE WO&tltlG ? 



41 



























Since it came from a genius, this made quite an impression on me. After this I learnt to face the 



This has been the case with many artists when I've passed this wisdom along. Recently, two 
previously sound-addicted computer animators were shocked to find that their plugged-in 
colleagues instantly made them objects of ridicule for not having wires coming out of their 
ears. They were even more surprised at the startling improvement in their work. 

... end of lesson one. 



45 
































ADVANCING BACKWARDS TO 1940 

Let’s advance backwards to approach where animators were during the ‘Golden Age'. And then 
go forward from there - so we can do new things. 

The thing you are going to build on must be basic. 

Everyone wants to decorate their house with interesting pieces before putting in the corner¬ 
stones and supports. Everyone wants to jump ahead to the sophisticated bit - glossing over 
the dull, old support work. 

But it’s the thorough understanding of the basics that produces real sophistication. 

As Art Babbitt said: 

The knowledge that went into making little drawings come to life is in the early Disneys, 
Nobody taught us how to articulate these fanciful characters. We had to discover the 
mechanics ourselves and pass them around amongst each other. There are many styles but the 
mechanics of the old Disney animation remain.' 

They had it all worked out by 1940, around the time that Pinocchio was released, 
ft was a wonderful system - precise and simple. 

First we'll take it bit by bit - and then we'll put it all together. 


46 



A very interesting thing happened when we worked with Grim Natwick. He was so old that 
each day he tended to snap back into a different professional period of his life: one day he 
would come in and do circular 'rubber hose' animation from the 1920s, then the next day he 
would be in a 1936 1 Snow White' phase, making tons of smoothly moving drawings, the next 
day would be sharp, physical actions with plenty of static holds from his 1950 UFA 'Mr Magoo' 
period, then he'd be doing as few drawings as possible, as if he were animating a 1960s TV ad, 
and then the next day back into fulsome Fantasia mode. 


One day I found him drawing in an old style - something like this: 



He wasn't just showing the arc of the action - he was indicating all the different spacings on 
his drawing. 


I suddenly realised that this was probably the origin of the charts that animators put on the 
edge of their drawings 



I asked, ‘Hey, Grim - did these charts just gradually move across the page away from the 
drawings? 


A far-away look came into his eyes -. Yes ..,' 


47 



In the 1920s, animators did most of the work themselves. Dick Huemer was the top New York 
animator and was working for Max and Dave Fleischer on their Mutt and Jeff series. Dick told 
me they said to him, 'Your work is great, Dick, but we can't get enough of it/ So Dick said to 
them, 'Give me someone to put in the in-between drawings and I'll do two to three times as 
much work.’ And that was the invention of the 'inbetweener'. 


Dick later said in an interview that it had been the Fleischers' Idea and that he just went along 
with it. But Dick actually told me that he had invented the inbetween and the inbetweener, the 
helper or assistant. 


The main drawings or extreme positions came to be called extremes and the drawings in 
between the extremes were called the inbetweens. 


The chart shows the spacing. 


EXTR&Vfi 



jrX”T 



We'li put in three even inbetweens between the two extremes. 


Number 3 is smack in the middle between 1 and 5. Then we put number 2 right in the middle 
between 1 and 3 - and number 4 in the middle between 3 and 5. We've got the inbetweens 
spaced evenly. 





Take the example of a swinging pendulum: The extremes are where there is a change in 
direction - the ends of the action where the direction changes. 



. — exi&sme 


48 


EXTREME 




Because the pendulum's arm maintains its length as it swings, the middle position creates an 
arc in the action. We can see how important that middle position between the two extremes is 
going to be to us. 




it's obvious how important this middle position is. In the 1930s they called this the 'break¬ 
down' drawing or 'passing position' between two extremes. 


We'll add two inbetweens. 








1 


OR 

Pass w6t 

Fosmm iHBzwEm 




z 


3 


4- 


o 


Some animators underline the breakdown or passing position because it's so important to the 
action. I have the habit of doing this because it's a position which is crucial to helping us invent. 
We're going to make tremendous use of this middle position later... 


49 













If we want to make our pendulum ease in and out of the extreme positions, we'll need a 
couple more inbetweens: 



So our chart will look like this, 


/ i 3 ± 6 a7 

H_)— I —|—|—| 


What we're doing is easing in or easing out of the extreme positions. 'Slowing in' or ‘slowing 
out' is the classical terminology for it, but I prefer today's computer animators' term of 'easing 
in’ and ‘easing out'. 

To make the action even slower at the ends, let's add a couple more inbetweens. 



Ken Harris always called it 'cushioning' * which is a nice way to think of it. 


Master animator Eric Larson - who became the instructor of the younger Disney animators 
says that what animation has to have 


is a change of shape. 

So, let's change from a closed hand 
to a pointing finger. 



C-x 

4 \ 


*5 






















If we 'ease out' of number 1 in order to point - number 5 - the chart will be: 



O -■]£>■ 

oU*7 


asrr 
out 


Alternatively, if we ‘snap out' or 'speed out' of the closed hand and 'ease in' or 'cushion in' to 
the pointing finger the chart will be: 





For a more relaxed, slower action we could add more inbetweens and ease out of the closed 
hand, and speed through the middle, and then ease in to the pointing finger. 


/ 




51 



The animator can get away with just drawing the two extreme positions and making a chart for 
the assistant to put in all the inbetween positions, 

i was spoilt by being taught by marvellous, hardworking, top Hollywood animators and I had a 
few shocks when I worked with some of the lesser mortals. 


Here's how a Hollywood hack animator might duck the work: 

A character enters screen left.. . and goes out screen right. 



To walk across the screen it's going to take 4 seconds - 96 frames. So the animator does draw¬ 
ing number 1 and drawing number 96 and gives this chart to the assistant and goes off to play 
tennis. He wanders back in next day and blames the assistant for the terrible result. 

This may seem far-fetched, but it does happen. 

Moving on - we know the extremes and the breakdowns are crucial to the result, but the 
inbetweens are also very important. 

The genie in the computer creates perfect inbetweens, but for 'drawing' people - getting good 
inbetweens can be a real problem. 

Grim Natwick constantly intoned, 'Bad inbetweens will kill the finest animation.’ 

in 1934, when the novice Milt Kahl - having just started work at Disney - first met the great 
Bill Tytia, he told Tytla that he was working in the inbetweening department Tytla barked, 'Oh 
yeah? And how many scenes have you screwed up lately?’ 


52 








Like most people starting out, I did all my own inbetweens. Then I got my first 'official' job 
animating for UPA in London. They gave me an inexperienced assistant who drew well, but this 
is what happened: 

We had a simple character of the period, a little girl called Aurora who was advertising Kia Ora 
orange drink. 'Where's the Kia Ora, Aurora?' 

She looked like this. 

I drew drawings 1 and 3 and 5, my assistant put in inbetweens 2 and 4. 



z 4- 

4 



A A 

He had ambitions as a designer and he didn't like egg-shaped eyes like this: f J * ; 

\. 4 ' 

He liked circular eyes like this: (J) .A 
So the inbetweens all went in like this: 



The result on the screen, of course, is this: 
Wobble, wobble, wobble. 





As is common in production when racing to meet the deadline, we end up hiring anybody off 
the street who can hold a pencil. And this is what happens: 


Say a live actor is holding an animated coffee cup - 




The inbetweener from the streets doesn’t understand simple perspective - so the curved top of 
the cup gets put in straight on the inbetweens. 



I 




Result: 'Frying tonight/ Wobble, wobble, wobble 

And if it's this wobbly with a simple thing, just imagine what it's going to be like when we are 
dealing with complex drawings. All the shapes will be doing St Vitus's dance. So the assistants’ 
or inbetweener's job is really volume control. 

A lot of assistants worry about the quality of their line - matching the animator's line quality, t 
always say never mind the line quality - just get the volumes right. Keeping the shapes and 
volumes consistent = volume control! When the thing is coloured in, it’s the shapes that we see 
- it's the shapes that dominate. 



54 




Whenever we were under the gun and short of skilled helpers, we found if we outnumbered the 
dodgy inbetweens by three good drawings to two bad ones - we just scraped through with an 
acceptable result. 



When we only had two good ones with three bad ones in between them - the bad ones out¬ 
numbered the good ones and the result was lousy. 


<Sco£> 

/ 




— (• 


t 


4 - 


f£oo£> 

5 


BAD BAP BAD 


i 


if the breakdown or passing position is wrong, all the inbetweens will be wrong too. 


£jcop 

I 


0 


3 


BAP 

Bi^AKoom 

4“ 


5 


GrCW 

& 7 


j| ..j »l| Tl 

1 SAP BAP 




I ' 


BAD l?AP 


When we're not accurate, here's what happens: The animator supplies a chart and wants equal 
inbetweens. This is putting them in the right place. 



But let's say the assistant puts the breakdown or passing position slightly in the wrong place - 



m li^RB ... NOT OK- 




55 




1H£K 

IN 


So: Number 4 is wrong. 

3 compounds it. 

2 compounds it more. 

And instead of ending up with fluid actions like this - 



- well get this all-over-the-place kind of thing. 



One thing an animator should never do is to leave his assistant to make 'thirds'. 


12-2 4 - 

If we need to divide the chart into thirds - |--j .f-- —| 


- the animator should make one of the inbetween positions himself - 


{ 2 - 3 4 





- in order to leave the assistant to put in the remaining position in the middle. 


56 
















Leaving thirds to the assistant is cruel and is asking for trouble - but it's fair to make a chart like 
this, calling for an inbetween very close to an extreme: 




MAKE Om /AlStWN 




MA KjE ONE I^TWN OUQZ 10 



MAKE ewe (STWN CU£^ jb i 


MAKE ANOTH^ ISWiH CUX^fZ TO- 4- 



And now we come to the Great Circling Disease. For some reason, animators just love circles. 
We love to circle the numbers on our drawings. Maybe it's because, as old Grim Natwick said, 
'Curves are beautiful to watch.’ Or maybe it's just a creatively playful thing. 


I once worked with a Polish animator who circled every single drawing he made! 








‘Is animation, man! Circle! Circle! Circle!' 

You'll notice that so far I haven't circled any extreme positions. In this clear working system 
and method developed by the 1940s, the extremes are not circled, but the key drawing is. The 
drawings which are circled are the 'keys'. 

Question: What is a key? 


Answer: The storytelling drawing. The drawing or drawings that show what's happening in 
the shot. 


57 






If a sad man sees or hears something that makes him happy, we'd need just two positions to 
tell the story. 



These are the keys and we circle them. 

These are the drawings we make first. How we go interestingly from one to the other is what 
the rest of this book is about. 

Take a more complex example: 

Let's say a man walks over to a board, picks up a piece of chalk from the floor and writes some¬ 
thing on the board. 



If it was a comic strip or if we wanted to show what's happening on a storyboard, we'd need 
only three positions. We'll keep it simple and use stick figures so we don't get lost in detail. 
These three positions become our keys and we circle them. 


The keys tell the story. All the other drawings or positions we'll have to make next to bring the 
thing to life will be the extremes (not circled): the foot 'contacts', the passing positions or 
breakdowns and inbetweens. 


58 









tf we time this action out with a stopwatch, we might find that our first key position at the start 
will be drawing 1. Say it takes him 4 seconds to walk over and contact the chalk on the floor- 
we'd circle the second key drawing as 96. And when he's stood up, stepped over and written 
his stuff, it might take another 4 seconds - so our third key could be the last drawing in the shot 
-192. The whole shot would then take 8 seconds. 

Of course, we don't need to time it all out first, but before we dive into animatorland with ail 
that stuff, we have to clearly set out with our keys what it is we're going to do - and we can 
test our three drawings on film, video or computer. 

We haven’t dealt with how he or she moves - whether the character is old or young, fat or thin, 
tall or short, worried or happy, beautiful or ugly, rich or poor, cautious or confident, scholarly or 
uneducated, quick or slow, repressed or uninhibited, limping or fit, calm or desperate, lazy or 
energetic, decrepit or shaking with the palsy, drunk or frightened, or whether it's a cold-hearted 
villain or a sympathetic person - in other words ail the ‘acting* stuff, plus all the trimmings - 
clothes, facial expressions etc. 

But what we have done is made it very plain what happens in the shot before we start. 

If we were to make a diagrammatic chart of the whole scene, it would end up looking some¬ 
thing like this: 




pLUi. KPDWfiS. ANP> tWE£N£ 


59 







important animators are called key animators, and word got round that they just draw the 
keys - anything that they draw is a key - and slaves fill in the rest according to the little 
charts provided by the key animators. Wrong. A key animator is simply like a key executive 
- an important one. 


Many good animators call all their extremes 'keys' - i sure used to. But it makes life so much 
clearer and easier if you separate the keys from the extremes. Actually, I never heard Ken Harris 
ever call a drawing a key, but he would say, 'Draw that one first. That's an important drawing.' 
And it was a key, really. 

I've worked every system, good, bad or half-baked, and experience has convinced me that it’s 
best - even crucial - to separate the storytelling keys from the extremes and ail the other stuff. 
(Of course, as in our example above, the three keys will also function as extremes.) Separating 
them out stops us getting tangled up and missing the point of the shot, as we vanish into a 
myriad of drawings and positions. 

There may be many keys in a scene - or maybe just one or two - it depends on what it is and 
the length of the scene. Its whatever it takes to put it over, to read what's to occur. 

You can spend time on these keys. 

I remember once visiting Frank Thomas and he was drawing a cat. 'Dammit,' he said. 'I’ve been 
working all day on this damn drawing - trying to get this expression right.’ 




i was shocked. All day! Wow! That was the first time I ever saw anyone working so hard on a 
single drawing. How was he ever going to get the scene done? Finally, the penny dropped. ‘Of 
course, stupid, Its his key]' It's the most important thing in the scene! He's got to get that right! 

And it was encouraging to see anyone that great struggling to get it right! 









We just start drawing and see what happens - like a kid drawing in the page comers of a 
schoolbook ~ stick the numbers on afterwards, 

Disney director-animator Woofie Reitherman said, 'When I didn't know what I was doing in an 
action, I always went straight ahead. I'd just start on ones. Half the time I didn't know what I 
was doing. To me, it’s fun. You find out something you wouldn't have found out otherwise.' 


Api/anta^^s 


WE <3&T A AMTU PAL FLOW OF 
FLOIP ( SPONTANEOUS ACVON. 

irw&Tk vmriY cf tMppovmjc «. 

ITS VERY 'creative - WE GO WITH 
Tk FLOW - TAKING ALL OFTe ACTON 

As IrOOWFZ AiONG. 

OFTEN Tk UNCONSCIOUS M/NP 

STARTS TO KICKIN'* LIKE AUTHORS 

SAY SMC THFUC CHARACTER TELLS 
THEM WHATC GOING To PARPEN . 

i r can produce suRprm -/mcd. 

ITS FUN. 


^ADVANTAGES 

... 

* TJ-jiNGc start to wan per.. 

_- 'TIME 'STRETCHES The SHOT 

Pets longer longer < 

— CHARAewm GROW W SHRINK- 

*— WE CAN TEND TO MISS Tie POINT 
OFTke. SHOT 2>C NOT ARRIVE AT 
Tie. FiGtir PLACE AT%t RIGHT V MB 

.— Tht Director hates if brCa oe 

m/sHE CAN'r SEE WHATC HAPPEN WO 

-—- i vt LOTS OF WORK 7O CLEAN UP 
The M0GS AFTERWARDS ~ W ITS 
HARP TO ASS/ST 

,—- ITS EXPENSIVE - The PRODUCER 
PATHS UC- 

. — IT Can be hard on iu nerves - 

map artist dull Nervous break¬ 
down vme as we creatively 

leap IN 2>vo THRASH AROUND 
IN Tkt VOID - ESPECIALLY WITH 

.looming deadlines. 


61 



2. The planned way, called 


First we decide what are the most important drawings - the storytelling drawings, the keys - 
and put them in. Then we decide what are the next most important positions that have to be in 
the scene. These are the extremes and we put them in - and any other important poses. Then 
we work out how to go from one pose to another - finding the nicest transition between two 
poses. These are the breakdown or passing positions. Then we can clinically make clear charts 
to cushion and ease in and out of the positions and add any finishing touches or indications for 
the assistant. 




( POSE TO POSE 



To illustrate how effective the pose to pose method is, the brilliant Disney art director-designer 
Ken Anderson told me that when he was making layout drawings of characters for animators 
working on Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, he drew lots and lots of key poses of Grumpy 
for each shot Ken's drawings were then given to one of the Grumpy animators. Ken found out 
later that the guy just put charts on the drawings, handed them to his assistants and went off 
to lunch, and took the credit, for what in effect, was Ken’s fine animation. 




WE Get Cd ry: 

T'h TomTOFIttt SCENE IS NCB 

P-uP C-dEAR- ■ 

trs orPucruno, calculaitd logical . 

WE CAH SET NICE DRAWINGS W 

clears readable fob mens- 

ITS IN ORDER- 0%t klBffmt(NQR 
HA PPEN AT & RIGHT %I MB a«J J W 
•iU e RIGHT fEACf lN Ik OVmME Time j 

ALLOTTED- ! 

DIRECTOR iOYER: US . | ; 

iTs EASVTO Asctsr I 1 

its a Quick way to work 

■FReEL pc up /o To MO(3 r SCmEC . 

T//e PRODUCER. LOVES. US. 

WE KEEP SANE, OUR HAIR iSNT 
STAND I NO ON END- 

We EARN iVOEE AAONEY ni WE ARE j 

SEEN To BE Em PONStBEE PFC'PlF 

‘gS cbeard/ not aaad artiste. ! 

TFc>Pu C0S Have ro ON TiME ON I 

BtiOGFT, so Bf&UJANCE IS Nor P-f WARDED 
M MUCH AS fSp-OApAfliy- < n&A FfXM PXfEEOCP I 
yOT'KiNG Both TEES crTut 1M pofr I 

P.Ai iS fOEWKO THE/ FRY US f£&. peai VERY I 


DISADVANTAGES 
Bum AND ITS A 'BIG BUT 

we am as %e mw 

The ACTION Can BE a Bn CHQPpy 
A Bit UN NATURAE* 

AMU T WE CORRECT THAT BY AWiNC 

A ioT oEOYEBtAPPim ACTION T6 If 

n can Go eat n To other wav 
a«J Be rubber y Squish Y- 

EQuAUW UN NATURAE- 

IT CAN Be loo LITERAL "A BIT 

com - blooded, No surprises 

W H FPeO T-t-p. MAGicS 






So it's pretty obvious the best way to work is going to be: 



First we plan out what we're going to do in small thumbnail sketches. (It's also a good idea to 
have done this with the other two methods.) 


Then we make the big drawings - the storytelling drawings, the keys. Then we put in any other 
important drawings that have to be there, like anticipations or where hands or feet contact things 
- the extremes. Now we have the structure, just as we had with the pose-to*pose system. 

But now we use these keys and important extremes as guides for things and places we want to 
aim at. After you get your overall thing - go again. Do one thing at a time. We'll work straight 
ahead on top of these guideposts, improvising freely as we go along. 

We'll do several straight ahead runs on different parts - taking the most important thing first 
We may have to change and revise parts of the keys and extremes as we go along, rubbing bits 
off and re-drawing or replacing them. 

So: we make a straight ahead run on the primary thing. 

Then take a secondary thing and do a straight ahead run on that 

Then take the third thing and work straight ahead on that 

Then the fourth thing, etc. 

Then add the hair or tail or drapery or flapping bits at the end. 

Advantages ! disadvantages 

-— WQft-KlNG Thll-S WAY COM.SlN0* j —— NCDNF THAT I fKN'OW OF.,, 

Ti\t &TRMCrUR£p PlAmiMCi OF I 

WORKING FFOM POST To POOF ! 

WIW “five. NA7U8AF FF&FFfQN I 

of 7k Straight ahead apfdc/ch. ; 

•— /TS A DAAANCF ggrWE&M 

Punning spontanf try, 

-—- in A BALANCE BftWff/7 



63 






Let's take our man going over to the blackboard again. 

What do I do first? 

Answer: The keys - the storytelling drawings or positions that have to be there to show what's 
happening. Put it where you can see it.., so it reads. 




What do we do next? 

Answer: Any other drawings that have to be in the shot. Obviously, he has to take steps to get 
over to the chalk - so we make the 'contact' positions on the steps where the feet are just 
touching the ground. 

There's no weight on them yet - the heef is just contacting the ground. As with the fingers just 
contacting the chalk - they haven't closed on the chalk yet 

if we act all this out, we might find he takes five steps to get to the chalk and bend down. I 
notice that when I act it out, I automatically pull up my left pant leg as I bend down, then I put 
my hand on my knee before my other hand contacts the chalk. I would make an extreme where 
the hand just contacts the pant leg - before it pulls up the pants. 

These will be our extremes. We're working rough, sketching things in lightly - although we 
probably have made rather good drawings of the keys. (I haven't here, because I'm trying to 
keep it simple, for clarity). 


64 








nr} Ft 




£X7EOA\ 


&yVt&'Afr cXTf&frr 


£x7f&A£ 


ccktx: 



We could act it out, timing the steps and putting numbers on the extremes or we could leave 
the numbering till later. I would probably put numbers on it now and test it on the video to see 
how the timing feels as his steps get shorter - and make any adjustments. 

What next? 

We'll break it down, lightly sketching in our passing positions or 'breakdowns’. We won't get 
fancy about it now - the fancy stuff comes later in the book. For now, we'll just make the head 
and body raise up slightly on the passing positions of the steps - like it does on a normal walk. 


/ 






Pa S5w6 H'smoa 

Oft 

E&AKPOWrt 



65 


































































We'd probably have numbers on the drawings by now, and when we test it, we've got three or 
four positions for every second - so it's easy to see what our timing is. And to make any adjust¬ 
ments. And if the director wants to see how we're doing - it looks almost animated. 

Now we'll make straight ahead runs on the different parts - using our extremes and breakdown 
positions as a guide - and altering them, or parts of them, if we need to as we go along. Take 
one thing at a time and animate it straight ahead. 


SePAm^ on Heap 



separate run oh feet 


Maybe he’s mumbling to himself, or maybe he's talking - maybe his head just wobbles around 
with self love. Whatever it is, we'll treat it as a separate straight-ahead run, working on top of 
what we already have. 

We’ll make another straight-ahead run on the arms and hands. Maybe they'll swing freely in a 
figure eight or a pendulum movement; or maybe they hardly move before he reaches for the 
chalk. Maybe he pulls up his pants as he moves along - or scratches or snaps his fingers nerv¬ 
ously, or cracks his knuckles. When we arrive at our key, we might rub out the arm and alter it 
to suit our arm action. Or delay his head. Or raise it early to look at the board. 

We can do lots of interesting things with the legs and feet, but for now we just want them to 
function smoothly. (I'm avoiding the problem of weight at this stage because the up and down 
on the head and body that we have at the moment will be adequate for now, and the figure 
won't just float along.) 

When he writes on the board, we'll treat that as a separate run. If he has long hair or a pony 
tail, we'll do that as a separate straight-ahead run. His clothes could be a separate run, baggy 
pant legs following along. If he'd grown a tail, that would be the last thing we'd put on. 


66 

















































I've shown these things in different colours to be as clear as possible. In my own work I some¬ 
times use different coloured pencils for the separate runs - then puli it all together in black at 
the end. I was delighted to find that the great Bill Tytla often used colours for the separate bits, 
then pulled them all together afterwards. 

To recap: 

Having made the keys, put in the extremes, then put in the breakdowns or passing positions. 
Now that we've got our main thing - we go again, taking one thing at a time. 

First, the most important thing. 

Then, the secondary thing. 

Then, the third thing. 

Then, the fourth thing etc. 

Then, add any flapping bits, drapery, hair, fat, breasts, tails etc. 

The general principle is: 

After you've got your first overall thing - go again. Do one thing at a time (testing as you go 
along). Then pull it all together and polish it up. Make clear charts for the assistant to follow 
up or do it all yourself. 

It’s like this: 


STORYBOARD 

4 r 

OfZs LAYOUTS 
(fdUMBN. Alt- SKteTTHjs) 


(K0y£) 



67 










Of course, you can work any way you want. There are no rules - only methods. You might feel 
like ignoring all of this and just work straight ahead or work from pose-to-pose, or start one 
way and switch to the other - why not? 

What's to stop us re-inventing the wheel? Lots of people are busy doing it. But on the other 
hand, why bother? 

This method of going at it was developed through concentrated trial and error by geniuses and 
it's a wonderful basis on which to operate. Having used just about every approach going - 
including no system - I've found this is the best working method by far. Get it in your blood¬ 
stream and it frees you to express yourself. Use this technique to get past the technique! 

Milt Kahl worked this way, Near the end of his life I told him, 'Now that I've been working the 
same way, I really do think that - apart from your talent, brain and skill - fifty per cent of the 
excellence in your work comes from your working method: the way you think about it, and the 
way you go about it' 

'Well ..he said thoughtfully, 'you're right. Hey, you've gotten smart!' Milt often told me that 
by the time he'd plotted everything out this way, he'd pretty much animated the scene - even 
including the lip sync. Then he'd finish putting numbers on the drawings, add bits and make 
little clinical charts for the assistant - easing things in and out. He complained he never reaily 
got to animate because when he'd finished plotting out all the important stuff - it was ani¬ 
mated. He'd already done it. 

I rest my case. 


prf pU nr^u 1 D — ™ i JIJ ri" 11 " 1 r5inHMWMHWr ■i-W-*- ■ i n ■■ H MmH WHI t i s—., | 

( T PSTING, T£ST(N<5j T£STiH&^J 

~ Va ^ ^n-| | -fHi i! ll17 i' in7] a j mju-J j . t ■»» - i .y gA 1 ■ PM l 8 ¥^***^^_ i ■ ■. ' .! n * ■ - v> ; -ymyw tni- «--~i u jj p j p j i ■ i Q 1} HP | T ■ i t y iniTKlMj i ♦ i i O»f 

I always use the video to test my stuff at each stage - even the first scribbles - time them and 
test them. In the 1970s and 80s, Art Babbitt used to get mad at me for it - 'Goddamit, you're 
using that video as a crutch!' 'Yes,' I'd say, 'but is it not true that Disney first instituted pencil 
tests and that's what changed and developed animation? And don't you always say that pencil 
tests are our rehearsals?’ 

Assenting grunt. 

'And what's the difference between rushing a test in to the cameraman at the end of the day 
when he's trying to get home, and if he does stay to shoot it, hang around the next day till 
the lab delivers the print and mid-morning interrupt the editor, who's busy cutting in the 
main shots, and then finally see your test - when we can use today's video and get a test in 
ten minutes?' 

Art would turn away, 'I am not a Luddite.' (Machine wreckers protesting the Industrial 
Revolution.) 


68 



Whenever Ken Harris had to animate a walk, he would sketch out a quick walk cycle test and 
we'd shoot it, pop the negative in a bucket of developer, pull out the wet negative (black film 
with white lines on it), make a loop and run it on the moviola. 

'I've done hundreds of walks/ Ken would say, ‘all kinds of walks, but i still want to get a test 
of my basic thing before I start to build on it.' 

Bill Tytla said, 'If you do a piece of animation and run over it enough times, you must see what's 
wrong with it/ 

i actually think the video and computer have saved animation! 

Certainly the success of Who Framed Roger Rabbit contributed substantially to the renaissance 
of animation, and having the video to test everything as we went along was crucial to us. We 
had a lot of talented but inexperienced young people, and with a handful of lead animators we 
were able to say, 'Take that drawing out, change that one, and put more drawings in here' etc. 
This enabled us to keep improving everything as we raced along, so we were able to collec¬ 
tively hit the target. 

Milt always said be would never bother to look at his tests. 'Hell, I know what it looks like - I 
did it!' He would wait to see several of his shots cut together in a sequence but only to see 'how 
it's getting over'. 

But that was his way. i have never reached that stage and probably never will. I test everything 
as I go along and it really helps. We're building these performances, so why not test our 
foundations and structure and decorations as we proceed? And since it reveals our mistakes - 
mistakes are very important since we do learn from our mistakes - we make our corrections and 
improvements as we build. 

Of course, at this stage i wouldn't have a problem routining my way through a job without 
testing - but why? 

The video or computer is there, so let's use it. 

An interesting thing I've noticed is that when animators get older their perception of time slows 
up. They move slower and animate things slower. The young guys zip stuff around. So, the 
video is a useful corrective to us old bastards. And young ones when it's too fast. 


69 




Before we dive into walks and all the articulation stuff, there are some other important camera 
techniques we should know about. 



On the next page is a 'classic' exposure sheet called the X-sheet or dope sheet - the first sight 
of which is guaranteed to put any beginner or artist off the whole business. When I was a kid 
and first saw one of these I thought, 'Oh no, I don't want to be an animator anymore. I'll just 
make the designs for other people to move around.' 

Actually, it's awfully simple when you make friends with it. 

It's just a simple and efficient form where animators write down the action and dialogue (or 
music beats) for a scene or shot - plus the information for shooting. 


Each horizontal line represents a frame of film. 



£k _ 

ON £ r-WME 


The columns 1 to 5 show five cel levels of animation we can use if we need them. (Usually you 
need just one or two.) 



ACTION 

DIAL 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

B G 

CAMERA 




























' % ■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■ H 








„ . . .... ,, 



70 












































































































































































SEOUENCE 


The A&fiOhl column is for 
us to plan out our timing- how 
long we want things to take. 


The D/'AL- column is for 
the measurement of the 
pre-recorded dialogue and 
sometimes the breakdown 
of music into beats etc. 


This 'classic' X-sheet is 
designed to hold 4 seconds of 
action (1 second = 24 frames). 

f ■ 

it has darker lines to show 
the footage, which is 6 feet 
of film (1 foot = 16 frames). 
Many animators always 
number the footage going 
down the page. 

I’ve also written in the 
camera dial numbers - the 
frame numbers in the camera 
column. 

Some animators time things 
out by thinking in seconds. 
Others think in feet = 2/3 of 
a second. 

Ken Harris thought in feet 
and would tap the end of his 
pencil every foot. I think in 
both seconds and feet, but 
seconds is easier for me. 

Also, you can think in 1/2 
seconds = 12 frames to a half 
second. That's march time, 
which is quite easy. 





- 


(50- 


OUji 


CAt/i&tA, PSAl- 
NWBBSi 



-2$£ 0 ' 1 


\ 




(Computer animators please 
bear with me here - you 
obviously have your own sys¬ 
tems of timing.) 



BHfET 


A C. -*■ f f Ohf 

. OiAU 

s 

4 

L J ...I. * VH,f 

» 0 

CAMERA tNlTRUCTEONB 



7i r f 



ZE 

fn 




r .1 A / 




f. 

St’ 

i 

•• MAA/ 


T 1 

\ 




■ 

1 

3 

.Sip 

l£ 

iTrtbLrtWC UVHST 


. .. .. l^iM . 





4- 


A W®.VB /WftlftATSD 


i 





f" 

(J 

,v :a wo: 

... 

iU 





..lA . 

1 




I***" 





- 7- - 

p 

3 .LUM PUT 4A/V 







s 

& 




i t 


1 




A 






/n 


To Atw 


r 



s 


i L 





X 





it* 

\ 

IT 5P3Z5^s!jaZ2^H7rZ 


' L, 

\‘ 

b._ I _. 





I 45 


1(5 ' . . 





r 




1.4- V 

ji* 






fr 1 1 

i 

hi 

-"fAI ■ - ... 






> 

i 


' 

VT-vF 

hi ■ "nflSi 

■ 




1 7 1 

/ 


17 


^ J 

7 1 





~ v, 


Jft 









■ ■ #■ 

/ 


..... 

} 


7 

“HZ 





7 


L20. 



! F 

r * 









/ , 





■ 



■ 


1 

1 , 







^5 ■> 

_._,__ 






-! 




1 X; 







_ 


% 








t 









M 









32, £ 









ja■ — 


,jH v j 









i 








fi j 

._ ] _ 

j 








/AV ! ■ 

P' 







3.3 


/ 4 







J-f / 


1 J 







3^ /.- - - 


t\ A 







% 


1 

¥ ^ 







. ST.i. 


& t ; 







je:J 

■. 


jl 

f 1 







S3 .. 


t 

ri. 

lil 







4c ] 



.■i 







4f f 









45. 


□ 









l T 

. } 








_ 







4.s‘ H . 


/S 

t 

, \ [ 




! -- - J 



,4fe..L 

, * 

f 

/ 







42 I 


■ .. 










■fi2\V W ' 

“j 

i 







*4? iir 

is/. _ 








' S 


‘.Til 

J 







Ff 


1 

f7 







S2 rl 


1 

... * 







.53. ! . 



|S» 









- 







; 


VP 







#6 ! 









£7 5 


i 







SE .. 1 


fl 







4 . I 


/ 

r ir- 

\ 







. f 


r 

** 

I- 







4f [ 


1 







fit - 









\±z _ 

■ 

r -f 

A 







T* \ r 

i 

f 

. i 









c v ■ ^ rT 

aljS^r 11 













T . 


m - t 


rts 




r - 1 i t .. .. 



s 









- f — 

■ > 

.. 

V 







m i 



fc.r.'k!-« 







n &as;t 


h 







Tz* 


7" ' A 







J*. 

i 

JJl 







77 c fi-'* 


f \ 








h L | 

K 1 







: .Tfc. . r _.... 


7 H 






, 

~ afc vvxiiZf... 



















7^ 

. _ 









Ho 


rP\ 

•t 

J 






" 


W 








7!>F.T^MPgA 7 


- 







Lfia_• ■' “ T ‘ 

^ / 


j v 







cn?. 


f, a 







'M 

.j/ 


/ 

¥3 








y 


if* t 







AT 



r 








m 

' ~ ~ / . - 



y 







m ItMftKJ 

_ 


i 

i" 







tO f ' ' f 










nH srn t n W _.... p - 


J 







iOMi jT 


1 







f f At A r ’ T 










7',4- 

z 





I 

1 


__■ - — 

L2SL _ W^T E Tl# • • :> .... 

r&fi 



"■ — 

t 



'cJO." 

































































































































































































































































































Si IL(J U £ N L. SL 




-■ 

Well plan out the action using the action column. 

Ken Harris always said, 'Come on, now, you can 
have fun doing the drawings later, but do the 
important part first - time it all out.' 

So we'd use a metronome or a stopwatch and I'd 
act it out several times, and we'd mark down on 
the sheet where things would happen. 


Let’s take our man walking over to pick up the 

chalk: 

We’ve got him taking five steps to reach the chalk. 

When ! act it out, the first two steps are leisurely - 
1 6 frames long {2/3 of a second). 

Then during step 3 he sees the chalk, and this step 
is slightly quicker - 14 frames. 


His fourth step is quickest -12 frames, 

On step 5 he slows up slightly -14 frames and 
he’s already started bending down, which 
takes over 2 feet till his hand contacts the chalk. 

I've got him tucking up his pant leg above the 
knee as he goes down - which takes 8 or 10 

frames. 


Of course, we can change all this as we work, but 
this becomes our guide and the points to aim for 
as we go along. 

Now we can put the numbers of these drawings on 
the page as I’ve done here. 


incidentally, although numbers 1 and 96 are keys 
and we've circled them, we don't circle the num¬ 
bers on the X-sheet. 

72 





































The five available 'cel' levels on this X-sheet are there so we can treat each character or element 
separately. 

Why have different levels - why not draw everything on one level? 

Answer: You can, but what do you do if you want to change the timing on one or two parts of 
the action and leave the other bits as they are? However, it's a good idea to try to keep to just 
one or two levels for simplicity. 

If we wish to use all five levels, start with the main action on level 1. Say a man walks in from 
one side of the screen and a cat walks in from the other. We animate our main action man on 
level 1, and the cat on level 2, adding a 'C after the cat numbers: 1 -C, 2-C, 3-C etc,, so as not 
to confuse it with the man drawing. The man drawings, or main action, don't need an iden¬ 
tifying letter. 

If a woman passes in front of them, we'd put her on level 3, adding a J W' behind her numbers. 

If a truck was to stop in front of them, we'd use level 4 for the truck and add a *T* to the 
truck drawings. 

If it's raining, we'd put the rain drawings on level 5, adding an 'R' after the numbers. 

The X-sheet would look something like this: 


' Trick WornN CAT MAN 


ACTION 

DIAL 

5 

4 

3 

1 

2 

1 

BG 

CAMERA INSTRUCTIONS 



/ —/? 

/ - T 

/ — W 


! / 

j i 

/ 



2 t : 

2- j . 

£ 



2- 

i 


Z* 



<r\j 

2 1 

3 


& 

; O 


2 



3 



A 

G 

4 

i AL 

I "T" 


: 


4- 


"" 





i 

S I 

| £ 


i g i 


S' 

/ 

$ 

T<X 


& 1 \ 

b’-T 

'■ & i 


! & l 

..Jo...... 

/ 


S ^ 


T i 


f 

7 ! 

7J 


7 

j ■ 

7 ■ . 



8 r 



; 8 j 

i $ 


1 


9 



I-. . -. T. .-n. .-W .T . 1 - “T . .T * 


[j§5T | 

L.&fel... 


" \ ■“"* 



This system obviously enables the cameraman to stack his levels correctly - working from the 
bottom up - and take a frame of film with all the numbers across matching the dial number on 
his camera. 

But there is one very important thing here: 


( ARB YOU A MEMBER OF K‘ h ?) 

1 ■ mm. -. i „ . - -- ■ - , - - , - rr - 


Keep It Simple, Stupid! 

Use simple numerical sequences! Animation is complicated enough without making it any 
worse. 


73 

































































My years in England taught me that the English just love complexity. A very brilliant friend, 
who is a top Oxford mathematician, called me up and said, 'We're about to penetrate your prin¬ 
cipality.’ I said, 'You mean you're coming to visit?' 'indeed.' 'Wow,' i said. 'You just used nine 
syllables to say what a North American would say in two! Vi-sit!' 

We sure used to pen-e-trate-our-prin-ci-pal-it-y with our exposure sheets until Ken Harris 
joined the team. 

* 

They looked something like this; 




Y2H-4J "TX B 
Y z 8~4a\ _ 

i y zg^eTn:%'S 

\ yz %■ 4 c.‘y.2 

*“• • • • -i x*.,m/. ..>_ jIl. x. •• • A \ .....1 





' v X..' jC.s ss \ 


Can you imagine trying to make any changes or improvements when you're weighed down 
with numbers like this? It would be like re-numbering the Encyclopaedia Britannica. 

Not only were our numbers complicated, but our action went from two frames to three frames 
then to four frames, bumping along then back to two frames etc., giving a jerky stop-start result 
to the movements. 

When we had just one level of action -- say it’s a tiger - everyone would cal! the drawings T1- 
1 and T1-2 and T1-3 etc. One day I asked, 'Why are we doing this?' The answer from the head 
of the department came, 'So we know it's a tiger,' 'But we can see it's a tiger! Why not number 
it simply 1 and 2 and 3?' Answer: That will just confuse the painting department' 

And it's not just the English who can overcomplicate! I once saw the working sheets of an 
established American animator who’s written two books on the subject, and his numbers 
looked like this; 












































QZAm T«f? PA WN,.. 

11 1 i ■ w ■ I n ii ■■ i I [I H i ■ I ■ i i ■ i i I 

And then the first real live master animator arrived to work with us. On his first 
day Ken Harris lightly pencilled in simple numbers going down the page on 
'twos', that is, two exposures per drawing. That was the first time I ever saw 
anyone go down the page on twos! 

Ken usually planned his action on twos: twelve drawings per second, shooting 
each drawing for two exposures, instead of working on 'ones', one exposure 
for each drawing, which is twenty-four drawings per second - twice the amount 
of work. 



Ken was from Warner Bros - used to tight budgets: the animators had to 
produce an average of 30 feet (20 seconds) a week or be fired. 


Since most normal actions work well on twos, Warner animators tried to 
avoid putting actions on ones. 


When he needed to go onto ones for fast actions (runs 
etc.), he’d just number it in on ones. i.e. 


Then he'd go back on to twos 


'Ok, Ken, but what do you do when 
you've worked it out on twos, but 
you find you want to add in ones to 
smooth it out more?' 

Answer: Add 'A' drawings. 

Great, so now all this TXL-1 and PP-2 
3/4 stuff goes out the window. We're 
not weighed down with meaningless 
technology. It becomes simpler to 
work and easy to make changes and 
improvements and we start getting 
better. 




33 






S4- 


, 




3 


i- ~ L 


S/L 


1 

3 

7 






ff7 



,|.7A 









3 





ii l 


r 

40 








! i. 



f ‘ 

4-3- 


; 

r 


■■ 

A-2. 


i 




. S. 










I 

. IS. 






JG 





! 

17 



(9 



..13... 



20 



3/ 



yy 





1 

2.4 









- -^1- - 



■a A 









. 3/... 





2'4 












A R 





■ 

r-ib 


, 





■ 






















: 

Ml " 


r 












rt iii 






ill _ . 




But there is an even better and simpler system! 


i 


i 



■4 


75 











































































































































































































Milt Kahl called it his system, but I suspect that the good guys at 
Disney all discovered it around the same time - it's so logical. 

Just use the camera dial numbers for the drawings. Go down the 
page on twos but use odd numbers. 

Then if we do need to smooth something out or we need very fast 
action, we just add in the ones. 


Milt told me, 'Whenever S see my drawings with odd numbers 
on them, I know I'm on twos and when 1 see even numbers, I know 
I’m on ones.’ 


I asked, 'What do you do when you want to get into a hold - just 
indicate you're holding that drawing with a line? And when you come 
back in do you start again on the dial number?' 


Answer: 'Yes. Come back in on the 


nu 


Not only does this make it easy for shooting, but it's 
easier when you do need several levels of action. 
We've now got the same dial numbers horizontally 
across the frame of film. 



6 

4 

3 

2 

1 


/ - 0 

/ P 

1 - c 

/ ^ & 

/ 

/ £ 

• . . 1 




\ 

7 i 


l 

5 


3 


- 1 

> 

3 1 


% 









4 

A— 

o 







5 

$ ... 






6 

■ 

i - - ... 

& 

7 


7 


7- C j 7 1 


7 

7 

. : i 




0 i 


g 


' DIAL 
Nm&m 


So, just go down the page with odd numbers - on twos - 
and drop in ones when you need them. 

It's simpler and frees you to concentrate on the work. 

Boy, did my output and quality improve! 

There are a couple of other things to mention before we start in 
on the great argument of ones versus twos. 


76 




















































































































































































There's a very important thing I (earned from Ken Harris, i know it 
sounds crazy - but if you have a series of 8 drawings - don't put 
the B in front of the number, i.e. 

| & 

Put the B after the number, i.e. — i.— 

3 _ _. 

4:_, 

S' I 


< 



We want to think as simpiy as we can. Ken said, 'Look, you don't call me Mister Ken. Put the 
letter behind so ali you think of is the numbers.' Put any formality or whatever behind. It may 
seem mad but it helps you do more work. Try it. All we're really doing is thinking of series of 
numbers from 1 to 10. Anything to keep it simple. Nobody could figure out how this sick old 
man could produce so much work - and of such high quality. He just kept everything as simple 
as could be. 


Two more things: 

The only time you should circle a drawing on the X-sheet is when 
a cycle of action re-starts - when we're repeating the same set of 
drawings. We circle drawing (1) to alert the cameraman that it's 
out of sequence with the normal dial numbers. 

Then we circle the drawing in the correct dial number when we 
come back to a normal sequence. 


My rule is: The only time you ever put a letter 
in front of a number is when you have an overlay cel 
(of something in front of the characters). 

Then you put 0-1 (for the overlay cel) or for a held cel 
(somebody's stationary feet, for example) and call it H-1, 



owmy 




iff! p\ 

f 


A 



; 


3 

a 

1 

B G 

- 

0-1 1 

H -1 . 

/ 

i 

lit 

1 

i 

% 

1 

L-. 

i 

i 

1 

3 1 

i 

:.? 

i 

. 4 ! ^ 

f , 

*4 

. 



1 

8 0 


i ~1 



> 



o 





-, 

.5. 



L . 



>/T) 






- L - -:> 

W 



4‘ 


zs 

6 


Nj 

A . Gl, 



“ST 



.. z 


{ 

1 

2 

O . 


'n 

✓4 


\\ 

" f* 





. Ajsa: 

rnq) 

W. 4^ 



7 

. . . . . 

%\ 






. 





■ 

a ,*>* 

Z'O’ 






27 



e,vn. a. ..: jl A . Jui i : X . Z-, A- 



■ OMfc 
AfCJMSS? 


77 






























































































Some people always complicate the numbering by calling ones and twos, 'singles’ and 'dou¬ 
bles'. In fact 'singles' is from a 1940s term for inbetweening when the animator did drawings 
1 and 3 and 5, made an evenly-spaced chart and said to the assistant, Tve left you singles.’ 

/ ^ <r 

L~j —f—-j - 

% 4" 

V 

i.e. single in betweens 

But when to use ones and when to use twos? 

The rule of thumb is - use twos for normal actions and ones for very fast actions. For instance, 
runs always have to be on ones - normal ’acting' on twos. 

Walks can function nicely on twos, but they’re going to look better on ones. 

Obviously, life is on ones (or whatever speed we film it on), but twos work well for most 
actions and, of course, it's half as much work as doing it on ones. And half as expensive! 
Working on ones is twice as much work and expense all the way down the production line. 

Apparently, in the early 1930s as Disney's animators got better and better, costs were sky¬ 
rocketing, and since twos work for most things, they tried to stay on twos whenever they 
could. 

A lot of great animators even say that twos are really better than ones, that ones lead to a 
mushy result, that broad, fast actions on twos ‘sparkle’ and adding ones diminishes that 
vitality. Weil, yes, this is true if the ones are just dumb, mechanical Inbetweens, 

My experience is different I’ve found that if you plan for ones, the result is usually superior to 
twos. 

I feel that twos are an economic answer to an artistic question. With twos being half the 
work, everybody gets to go home on time, and why would I make a case for ones? Hell, I was 
a studio owner. 

When I was re-learning all this stuff, I would wait till my animation on ones was traced and 
painted, then I'd shoot ft on ones as planned and then I'd take out every other cel and shoot the 
rest on twos to see if it 'sparkled' and was better. 

In ail but one case, ones worked better. The time the twos worked better was when I had an old 
lady pulling out a doctor's stethoscope from her pocket. The ones produced a very smooth 
movement 





It worked just fine, but then I removed every other painted inbetween and shot it on twos. It 
was better on twos! I cannot figure out why - it just was better. 

So they're partly right, I guess. But I became addicted to using ones whenever I could - ones 
seem to make for compulsive viewing and that's what we're after. 

Art Babbitt used to nag at me for using ones. ‘That’s too realistic - one of the things about ani¬ 
mation is that it's not like life!’ But I would often add ones to Art's work when he wasn't look¬ 
ing and it came out better - and he liked it better. 

Computer animators have everything on ones - with perfect inbetweens - and it hasn't dimin¬ 
ished the appeal of their work - rather the reverse. And twos tire the eye after a few minutes. 

I feel that ones are twice as much work, but the result is three times as good. Compulsive view¬ 
ing, easy to watch. 

i think my co-animator Neil Boyle said it best: 

Twos work - ones fly.' 

And ken Harris, who spent most of his life working on twos, would say to me when I'd be 
putting ones into his stuff, ‘Oh, it's always better on ones.’ 

There’s one thing that always makes me crazy. When you have a character animated on twos 
and the camera is panning with it on ones you get stroboscopic jitter. Either pan with it on twos 
(not great) or add in single inbetweens so it doesn't strobe! 

Some of the really good guys do this, it's a mystery to me. Why don't they add single 
inbetweens so it doesn't strobe? 

Maybe its because a lot of things don't show up on the pencil test. It's when it's coloured 
in that we see the bumps. 



It’s a combination of twos and ones. Not only but also. 

Normal actions on twos - which is the bulk of our work anyway. 
Fast or very smooth actions on ones. 

Normal spacing on twos. Far apart spacing on ones. 


79 




An endless debate has gone on among classical animators about whether to register the draw¬ 
ings on top pegs or bottom pegs. At present, bottom pegs seem to have won out; most people 
seem to be animating using the bottom pegs to hold their drawings. 



Frank Thomas has said, 'Getting off the top pegs and working on bottom pegs has actually ' 
advanced the art of animation because you can roll the drawings as you work and see what's 
happening - whether the creature is doing what you want.' And that's had a tremendous 
influence. (Disney animators all work on bottom pegs.) 

Alternatively, Ken Harris spent his life on top pegs and would flip his drawings and see what's 
happening - whether the creature is doing what he wants. (Warner animators all worked top 
pegs). 



Ken would sometimes go red in the face and explode, 'You know who started that whole 
bottom pegs business? A goddam lazy cameraman who didn't want to be bothered reaching 
all the way under the glass pressure plate to place the cels at the topE He's the bum who 
started bottom pegs!' 


80 



It comes down to something like this: 




If you only have four fingers you can still ro! f 
four sheets at once, plus the bottom drawing 
- giving us five images. 



out having to take the drawings off the pegs. 


When Ken had calmed down, he used this example: 

I WHS OFFE&NGr You A OGaNZs rfcOM A CIGAR, COX - 
WOm^O y<?U A-iKB- PrZSi&iT IT-TO YOU 



81 




And what's going to make it easiest to draw? 



Add to this the fact that most of the discs that animators use are made of heavy metal with inset 
panning bars with screws to tighten and release them for sliding pans. It’s pretty awkward with * 
all these points sticking up and we unconsciously have to dodge the pegs as we draw. 



ouch. Garni ouch! 


The engineer who made most of the equipment for my English studio arranged the panning 
bars differently every time. I had to fire a guy once, and his close friend - who was very talent¬ 
ed - quit with him. To get even with me they ordered a special disc (on the firm) made with 
three panning bars for different field sizes, top and bottom - six in all! By the time you added 
in the screws it looked like this: 



YtW vUCVG) YOU U&TO 
DpAW CH THIS ? YOU COULD 

upiA) r/fngfeiyE cars, 


82 





But how often do you really use the panning bars? Not too often, in my experience. 


One day about fifteen years ago I found layout artist and designer, Roy Naisbitt, working on a 
big piece of white plastic Perspex (Plexiglass) with a peg bar just taped on to it. 


What a solution] 



You tape the pegs on wherever you want, top or bottom. 

Also, I keep a heavy metal disc with panning bars beside the desk for when I very occasionally 
need it for a mechanical pan. 










i . . 



This also allows you to tape on taller pegs to carry more drawings if you're on top pegs. The 
shorter peg bars are OK for bottom pegs, but the drawings keep falling all over the floor. Again, 
an elastic band helps. 

I'm delighted to see that Roy's solution has spread through the industry, as I've seen several 
animators walking around in Hollywood with Perspex discs and a taped-on peg bar tucked 
under their arms. 

It works just fine. I animated the first close-up on Who Framed Roger Rabbit in a Welsh hotel 
room with a Perspex disc on my knee - and top pegs! 

I work both ways. Again, it's not only but also. Top pegs is great for drawing and bottom pegs 
is great for rolling. Take your pick. 

Obviously, computer animators are free from all this tactile nonsense - but I'm sure you have 
equivalent stuff to cope with. Having started out as a drawing animator, Jim Richardson, now 
a computer animator, told me that when he first switched over to the computer, he found it was 
like 'animating with a microwave'. 


33 




MORE ON SPACING 

Somebody once said an animator is something between an artist and a garage mechanic. 
Here's more nuts and boits from the garage - but very interesting ones, and it really helps to 
know them. 

Ken Harris showed me this one: 



Say we've got a telephone pole moving up quickly in perspective. Where do we put our middle 
position? 







T 


You'd put it in about here, right? 


84 




Wrong. Even after fifteen years' experience I got it wrong. And nearly every professional I've 
asked since has gotten it wrong. 

Here's where the middle position is: 



Rufe in the lines like this and the cross point tells us it's here. At least technically. And just keep 
doing it: 



This works well for fast moves. However, for more normal moves it's best to cheat ft - split the 
difference - and come back about half way to where our first guess was. Do that throughout 
and you'll get a better result 



WE Au- KHCVi FftW gKpgp 
MOW NhlS MtP Pt£ 
POStTtCN WCfoCS- 





% 


£> o 


jNoiPsmi-pr- ovsrsws _ 

IN -fte SAME RWCe - lXSSW r 
'T&AiEL Wrw OF if. 

JL UP- ABT£»r. 


'iaS&v_ . 



35 





























































'ike SAM£Tfl/A& 

/\ PPu^l'io A iroir 

VI sv OF SOMEBODY 
0>£ SdMettMo- 

comm up at its - 
Fast: 



S*y A D/SC 
IS SPIHHIN&UP 

Towards us - 



Am TO Po WITH "pe SSAM£ SOW Of TH ING ■ 

~JAKe 4 POSTONS OF a BAU~ R&VOlPfiNG HOW kpt> !H ilr€. M /DDi£ FtStTiOHS <K-J see 

atc'Uko a Central point - tow cddsf TH£YA£FioTEe. oursttEcfiktAFc, 




Am ih Hit next /m/d positions ^ ta. fwiempsr 

O/VeS W/M- ALMOST COV£& UP l&e. CWTSffiP 8A4-S. 



"rt e Po jwt /s 7 ‘Nat Tfe £ Pa e-/T£ or i?i&- 

/wapnv^s vv/u- ctusrae Arife epees 








86 














So when we're going to turn a head, it's going to be the same kind of thing: 


A£r BABSiTr 

StfOWeP US 

™s- 


A To B 



if w&jusr /NBerweew /r- 

/fW4- LOOK uMeiit 

s udc a powp hhao ww/ee 

-ffie HEAD RBMAIN S StAT/C - 



so we p/sPiA ce the 

MIODLB POSITIOHTO MAKE 
IT CONVINCING- — 




POfLClAR-ifY j 




Incidentally - on a head turn, Ken Harris showed me this: 



Do it yourself or have somebody else hold up two fingers. Look first at one, relax, then turn the 
head round to look at the other finger. During the head turn, something interesting will hap¬ 
pen. The person will blink. The eye, switching focus from one side to the other, will blink en 
route. (Unless they're frightened - then the eyes will stay open.) 


So W^LU PROBABLY 
BLtHK -fk&Ttt&l' 



87 




CLASSIC tNg£TWB&i MISTAKES 



A MA^ET HITS A NAIL 
WHICH BENDS " 

AND WE WANT OH£ IN BETWEEN 
RIGHT IN THE M IWLg. 

> 3 


2 - ' 

OuR HELPER, WHO 1 $ 

PLUGGED INTO A CP, 

Phone or whatever, 
Poes precisely 

WHArk requested ahp 

pure IT RIGHT 
IN THE MIOPLT,,, 

* WELL, I FOLLOWED 

you a qha&v ;/ 




later the same 

plugged hn person 
PUTS IN A DROP OF 
WATER. BETWEEN 

These two positions, 
I 5 

L._»j—J 

2 . 



AND PUTS IT 
BIGHT IN TPE 

M IDDLE -a 

AGAIN 




Omousvf 

the change 

ON Li TAKES 
PLACE ON THE 
CONTACT. 

Gottd use 
COfA/AON 
SENSE . 


IT GOES ON AND 0 N'- 


QOFT RUBBER 
BALL FALLING - 










ofcouaee 

SHOULD SE-. 

4— 



88 

































1 \mB, i P^rrrr 
K16HT tf( iU.e. 

P\K£ YO(J SAtP ' 


tjws f& ridiculous Bitrik, 

^QUiVAPBMTOFT0N HAPPENS 
WITH GdMPlCA iNBPTi/'fEENp- 


tvery drawing is important. We can't just have brainless drawings joining things up. in one 
sense there are no inbetweens - ali the drawings are on the screen for the same amount of time. 


amp. oufL 

TELEPHONE- POUT pTlHClPLC.,- 



Suripur/T , 

piOfiT JN-fU^JAiO&t-a.,. 



its not i-f Hes- 

f3oT 7© THINK IN 

of masses ! 


WPSN A GOLF CHIPS 
fffrs A HAPO GOFF 8M-L" 



AT Ike. MOMBHT 
OF IMPACT WT MIGHT 
.DIOT&HO The. <SHAP& 



BUT IT WOULD 
(TO SACK TO ITS 
OWH SHAFT WiTHtti 
V£gV FSW FPAMF S. 


89 












































Ideally the inbetweener should understand and be able to complete eccentric actions. 




NOT 
JttZT A 
STRAIGHT 



AND NOT LIKE THIS 


BUT TIKE THIS - 



. — ■ ■ III I II MI ^ M II 1 ■ — ■ ■■ I j 

WATCH V OUR, ARCS 


Most actions follow arcs. Generally, an action is in an arc. Most of the time the path of action 
is either in a wavelike arc or in a sort of figure 8: 



But sometimes it is angular or straight. Straight lines give power. 



N<P ARC 





SNORT DISTANCE 
GOES STPAKStfr 




LONS PfSTAA/Ce 

<$OE‘Z IN AN ARC 


90 






















-ft&, AS£ or fk Acrtoti 

GriW$ US'lte 

COMriN HOU& MW 

iU THIS Am SW/N&- 
%c wfcfsr is L&Am& 
TWUee Wine 
fTW f>£AGS. 



Aw/> OF w&£ ih, BOtfm 

vom't €HRmr W <3?^ow- 
th^y manvtaw TFeie 
ofn&tm 



^ewofOY 

WRONG? 



oeviatay 

R-tSHT 


7 • 


Thf ARC IS 60 /MPORfA/Vfi £AY KVF HAVE FVmOMS ( f S t 5 J7- 






9 

5 


/ 




a 


\ 

• 3 




£>0 W JOIN THFM UP UKJ£ THIS? 


OR 'TH/S? 


Wg-'ir S£T aw utterly pimzMwr wwtr- so ive ro/t or pup Ht- drawwgs 

To MAK£ &UR£ WHATibt- ARC OF “Tie ACTiOiY OR f>A7H OF ACTION SH0UU> SB 


l 


<2FT£N 

/ 9 -x 

G . 


Wg-OFT THIS" 

° V 

/ 

\ 

USOALtV 

7® 

\ 

\ 

# 3 

W£ <3£rTF/C- 

\ 

/ 

N&THm om wm nor. thb otubr 

- 



91 

























IF IT tSKT W Hit- ARC ot> PAV-f OF ACT(Oh -Ike, ANIMATION WILT HOF FLOW. 

<BoF i& (Bo- WITH -Fit FlOW, USING ABCS (^UMLF SS A STRAIGHT (S 

The stuff on these pages looks awfully simple set out like this - 'Oh, I knew that.' But as soon 
as we get into sophisticated images and actions this all tends to go out the window. 

I recently heard about a Hollywood assistant, a talented draftsman who was working on real¬ 
istic horses (about the hardest thing there is to animate). He drew the stuff beautifully, but he 
just couldn't get the hang of keeping things in the right arcs. His directing animator, James 
Baxter, finally suggested he take a blue pencil and just trace the horse's eye positions sepa¬ 
rately and look what was happening to the flow. Clink! The penny dropped. 




O & . & 

AFTfIF 



So we're back to the old bouncing ball again. 


These basic things are so important. Most animators would say scornfully - 'Oh sure, the 
bouncing ball - everyone knows that' But do they? 


FAm A U&Wl SILUAP& 

BALL - IT WILL 
UPA^ IF PROPS - WONT IT? 



I M PAN f YOU COULPN'r 
HAVF A HmVYBlLUARO 



ball §L owm up as 

/r FALLS f COULt> YOU? 




AGAIN\ l-TS all (H gj BPAOm! 


Bur rw s t$ exactly 

WHATk (NA PmsNNlA iXf 
FU&U&H&P INSTRUCTION 
BOOK FOF AtiitMie&S. 


<S FTTiNO MOF£ M O VFM FNT WI Tf{ (N Fke> MASS 


Now we can start getting more sophisticated. We're going to keep finding ways to get move¬ 
ment within movement, action within action - getting more 'change', more bang for the buck. 



92 













I 


Ken Harris showed me how to exaggerate a hit. 
Say a creature shoots through the air to hit a cliff: 


CUfir 



We'd need about five drawings - even spacing on the head - to get him over to the cliff. 
The figures overlap slightly to help carry the eye - on ones, of course, because it's a 
fast action. No inbetween between 5 and 6. 


. 

SplX 



To get more impact, more power to the hit, add in another drawing where he just touches 
the cliff, just contacting it before he's flattened on the following frame. This will give more 
'change' - action within action. 




Now our action kind of leaps a one frame gap. We won't see it, but we'll feel it and it will 
give a much stronger impact to the hit. 



There's an interesting thing here which takes us right back again to the bouncing ball. 


In 1970 I showed Ken an early edition of Preston Blair's animation book when I was question¬ 
ing whether we need that amount of squashing and stretching of things. (You can gather by 
now that I'm not too keen on 'rubber duck' stretching around - although twenty-five years later 
that was what was required on Who Framed Roger Rabbit, a cartoon of a cartoon.) I noticed 
that Ken, though famous as a broad action animator, used squash and stretch rather sparingly. 


93 



























































































1 had the page open on the bouncing ball. It was like this - which certainly works OK. 



Ken said, 'Yeah, sure, but wait a minute - never mind that. We can make this much better. We 
need to have a contact in here before the squash/ 



'Put in a contact where the ball just touches the ground and then it squashes. That'll give it 
more life.' (Move the preceding drawing back a bit to accommodate it.) 




‘And do we do the same when it takes off again?' Answer: 'Not in this case - just when it 
contacts. You get the "change", then it's off again.' 


The animation grapevine flows like lightning: 'Did you know Ken Harris in London has correct¬ 
ed Preston Blair's bouncing ball?' Preston's next edition came out like this: 


Perfect. 



94 








This is not done to show disrespect for a skilled animator like Preston, who was the first 
classical animator to make real animation knowledge accessible, or to put him down in any 
way. Ken was just showing an important device to get more action within the movement. 

Ken continued, showing the same idea with a frog. 




'Have him contact the ground before he squashes down. Then keep his feet contacting the 
ground as he takes off. That'll give more change to the action.' 

Next, a jumping figure. 



‘Have at least one foot contacting the ground before the squash down, then leave at least one 
leg still contacting the ground as he takes off again.' 

This is great because we're getting more 'change' - more contrast - straight lines playing 
against curves. We're doing it with bones as well as round masses. We can use straight lines 
and still get a limber result. More on this later. We don't have to be stuck with rubbery shapes 
to get smooth movement. This will also free us from having to draw in a prescribed cartoony 
style because it 'suits animation' and is 'animatable'. 


I'm using crude drawings here because I want everything to be crystal clear. I just want to show 
the structure and not get lost in an overlay of attractive detail. 


95 










( ihe >ttBETWEEN ) 


[n the 1930s, when animators started studying live action film frame by frame, they were star¬ 
tled by the amount of transparent blurs in the live images. In order to make their movements 
more convincing, they started using stretched inbetweens. Ken used to call them 'long-headed 
Inbetweens'. 


For a zip turn - on ones - although it also works for two frames: 



pisrm^m 
-'in tiAN£> OY A -wsr 
MOVBfAENT 
We CAfV 
AN OY&ZLAP. 




f 


l 


i 







Let's take these drawings of pounding a door. Shoot the inbetween (2) on 
ones. This is one of the very few cases where you can shoot the sequence in 
reverse. It will work on ones - or with just the inbetween on ones and the 
extremes - (1) and (3), on twos. 


eithbz o& : 







/ 


z 

3 


2 - 


! 



96 








!n the late 1930s when tracing and painting the drawings on to cels was all done by hand, many 
painters became very adept at 'dry brushing' the desired transparent live action blur effect, 
Animators indicated the blur on their pencil drawings and the 'dry brushers’ would cleverly 
blend the colours together to simulate the transparency in the blur. 



After the 1941 animators’ strike and World War II, budgets shrank and so did the use of skilled 
backup painters. But a lot of animators just kept on indicating blurs and it became a cartoon 
convention to just trace this in heavy black lines - ignoring the fact that the dry brush artists 
were long gone. 



Now it's become a cartoon cliche. A cartoon of a cartoon: 



With characters just vanishing from the screen, Ken told me: 

'We’d have this witch up in the air laughing and then she's gone. Instead of making a blur we 
just used to leave hairpins where she was.’ 



‘We learned that from the Disney guys in a fish picture. They’d have these little fish swim¬ 
ming around and something would scare them and they were gone - that’s all - with just a 
few bubbles for the path they took.’ 


a 


v _■ _■ &■ 


P -j ^ & 

® Q » » o Os 4 & a s - * 

* C =» 

6 

o J 

2 * j ^ c t ■■ ) O** ,3 j I-, C 5 i' v 

> ' , 


« 

c ft o - 


■' -1 


97 





In the early days, speed lines were a hangover from old newspaper strips: 



Then they were used in animation to help carry your eye. But they're still around now when we 
don't really need them. You don’t even need to show the arrow entering. We have nothing and 
then it’s just there - maybe with the tail vibrating. 


IV Q T H I N Or 



j (ST SHOW 
The. pgStU-r , 



W& POHT MazD ' SPARKS" 

ip -rte a nimatioM 

HAS PGW&R WCMT 
UTrte BLACK Pm$ ABDvNB 
IT To Gvyg tr . 



However, I find the elongated or 'long-headed' inbetween is very useful - not just for a zippy 
cartoon effect, but also for use in realistic fast actions: 



98 




Again, we're returning to the original purpose - emulating the transparency of broad, live 
action blur movements. It’s especially suitable with 'soft edge' loose drawings - where the out¬ 
lines aren't sharp and enclosed like colouring book drawings. 



Doing too much action in too short a space of time, i.e. too great arm and leg swings in a run. The 
remedy: go twice as slow. Add in drawings to slow it down - take out drawings to speed it up. 


Ken Harris told me that when Ben Washam was starting out at Warner's, he became famous in 
the industry for 'Benny's Twelve Frame Yawn'. Ben drew well and made twelve elaborate draw¬ 
ings of someone going through the broad positions of a yawn - an action something like this: 



Then he shot it on ones. Zip! It flashed through in half a second! 

So then he shot it on twos. ZZZip! It went through in one second! 

So then he inbetweened it (twenty-four drawings now) and shot it on twos. ZZZZZZ! It went 
through in two seconds - almost right. 

Then Ken showed him how to add some cushioning drawings at the beginning and end - and 
bingo, Ben's on his way to being a fine animator. 



Some animators want to save themselves a lot of the work so they draw very rough. ('Ruff' - 
they don't even want to spend the time spelling 'rough'. Too many letters in it to waste our 
valuable time ...) And they leave lots and lots of work for the assistants. 

|*ve never understood why some people in animation are so desperate to save work, if you want 
to save work, what on earth are you doing in animation? It's nothing but work! 


99 



In the early days at The Disney Studio, when animation was being transformed from its crude 
beginnings into a sophisticated art form, they used to say, take at least a day to think about 
what you're going to do - then do it. 

One old animator, writing about the subject forty years later, advises that we should spend days 
thinking about it He's read up on Freud and Jung and the unconscious mind and he writes 
seductively about how you should ruminate until the last minute and then explode into a 
frenzy of flowing creativity. 

He told me that in a week's work he'd spend Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday 
thinking about it and planning it in his mind. Then on Friday he'd do it. The only problem is that 
it then takes three weeks for somebody else to make sense of it. 

I knew this guy pretty well - and he made it sound so creatively attractive that, though I 
felt it was artistic b.s„ I thought I better try it out I managed to ruminate, stewing and mari¬ 
nating my juices for about a day and a half and then couldn't stand it any more. I exploded into 
creative frenzy for a day, drawing into the night like a maniac. The result was pretty interesting, 
but it really did take three weeks to straighten it all out afterwards. And I don’t think it was any 
better than if I had worked normally - maybe just a bit different. 

I think Milt Kahi has the correct approach: 'I do it a lot. I think about it a lot, and I do it a lot.' 

Ken Harris worked intensely from 7,30 am till noon, relaxed at lunch, hung around doing bits 
for a while, went home to watch TV (or play tennis when he was younger) and thought about 
what he was going to do the next day - then came in early, avoided social contact and did It. 

He worked carefully and thought very hard about his stuff. He said he was surprised when 
he saw some of Ward Kimball’s working drawings because they were exactly the same as his - 
very neat - very carefully done - usually something on every drawing in the shot. - 

When I first saw Milt's work on his desk I was startled by how much work he did. His drawings 
were finished, really. There was no ‘clean up' - just ‘touch up', and completing details and 
simple inbetweens or parts of them. Ditto Frank Thomas, ditto Ollie Johnston, ditto Art 
Babbitt. The two exceptions to this were Cliff Nordberg, a marvellous 'action' animator who 
worked with me for a while, and Grim Natwick. Cliff did work very roughly - so he was awful¬ 
ly dependent on having a good assistant and it always caused him a lot of concern. And Grim 
was a law unto himself. 

There's an animation myth about the assistant always being able to draw better than the ani¬ 
mator. (I never met one who did.) The myth is that the animator creates the 'acting' and the fine 
draftsperson improves the look of everything and nails it all down. Well, there aren't that many 
fine draftspeople around and if they're good enough to nail all the details down and draw well, 
they really should be animating - and probably are. (An exception to this is the assistant 'styl¬ 
ist' on commercials where the 'look' of the thing is it's raison d'etre. There are a few excellent 
ones around.) 

Rough drawings have lots of seductive vitality, blurs, pressure of line, etc. But when they're 
polished and tidied up you usually find there wasn't that much there to begin with. 


100 



As we go along through this book itlt be apparent how much work we have to do to get a really 
interesting result. No matter how talented - the best guys are always the ones that work the 
hardest. But hang the work, it's the unique result that we're after. Every time we do a scene, 
we're doing something unique - something nobody else has ever done. It's a proper craft. 


how much pc m leave ro assistant? J 

W "... . .... . . ■■ . - .... . . . > i m .M . . 

Milt Kahl's answer: *1 do enough to have iron clad control over the scene.' 

Ken Harris's answer: 'I draw anything which is not a simple inbetween.’ 

Milt again: 'I don't leave assistants very much. How much can I get away with leaving and still 
control the scene? If it's fast action, I do every drawing.' 

The purpose of the assistant is to free the animator to get through more work by handling the 
less important bits - but as we have seen, he/she can't be just a brainless drawing machine. 
The computer produces perfect inbetweens, but obviously has to be programmed to put in the 
eccentric bits that give it the life. 

Here's my tip on saving work - my rule of thumb: 


-— 

( TAKE Tfe LONG SHOOT CUT, 

^Hl III*.■■■■ ^1 I I ■! I- .. 

The long way turns out to be shorter. 

Because: something usually goes wrong with some clever rabbit's idea for a short cut and 
it turns out to take even longer trying to fix everything when it goes wrong. 

f've found it’s quicker to just do the work, and certainly more enjoyable because we're on solid 
ground and not depending on some smart guy's probably half-baked scheme. 

And again, if you don't want to do lots of work, what are you doing in animation? 

One of the things I love about animation is that you have to be specific, if a drawing is out of 
place it's just wrong - clearly wrong - as opposed to 'Art' or 'Fine Art' where everything these 
days is amorphous and subjective. 

For us, it's obvious whether our animation works or not, whether things have weight, or just 
jerk about or float around wobbling amorphously. 

We can't hide in ail that ‘unconscious mind’ stuff. Of course, we can dress up and acf like 
temperamental prlma donnas - but we can't kid anybody with the work. It's obvious whether 
it’s good or bad. 

And there’s nothing more satisfying than getting it right! 



101 



WALKS 


Advice from Ken Harris: 

'A walk is the first thing to learn. Learn walks of all kinds, 'cause walks are about the toughest 
thing to do right.' 



A TpNDEhlCY 
T& DEA/V A WALK* 

TUF £LOW£R IT l$ y 

7 VO(i2B fN 

0AMA/C£ - 

AND FASTER - 
MCFF air OF 
BAL-AA/C-S ■ 


Walking is a process of falling over and catching yourself just in time. We try to keep from 
falling over as we move forward. If we don't put our foot down, we'll fall flat on our face. We're 
going through a series of controlled falls. 

We lean forward with our upper bodies and throw out a leg just in time to catch ourselves. Step, 
catch. Step, catch. Step catch. 


102 









Normally we lift our feet off the ground just the bare minimum. That's why It's so easy for us 
to stub our toes and get tipped over. Just a small crack in the pavement can tip us over. 




t tinier 


w 


sach asm In 

tffcOlNAHOK WITH Hie 


opposite Lj§ 
g/U-ANCg a^lHfcU^r 


AS WE DIP WWW 
wfe s?m& up- 

pgusAsiNS mf$& 
sSfcAVfTV JS P6IN4 
$cm OF ISe ACfiK- 

OUtt AfcAti Afcsfir 
yV/DST FbJffP 


© 

WBpeuS&TKAN 
Om CPMTl /WAY 
FteM staesiMSc*fe x<& 
f4&i YfiM£WB1&K£ 
AfeP- WAM*ftl$ 
natueau-V &(HgPSy 
CCNCmViNS. 

We Mpr CUR FOOT 

AS Mm# AS fOS&PiB. 


Afwe JEtSJ^MP 
We ii-ow tcwtf, 

yfls'^SteRII&uP 

mmx 


cmtACT 


■,mt 

I 


cx(R fbOi 

GUPsS POWN 
neei flizsr 

ft# A SOFT 
HANDING 


POSNr NEtP you MUCH WHEN VOU&/ttftB> TO ANIMAL TH£ WAlK 

OP A BUT HAPPY MAM - OK POPS if? 


OdflOHMB S 
peoptx? 
NwSSptPWP? • 
gWPY 7WE WE 
THRUST 

<5tW* CAtFiWJSqUs 

psrs our up to 

OfiB !-fo,eseiTv(5? 
( 76 o wans). 


pSEi-ESSf?) m iHimsntiG $cmx\fit inro^mmu oh waoks 


PlP you KNOW WE PUT A MltWOH ftuN&S. OF WMEttT ON OOK FEET £ACM PAY? 


MECWANT 


GbiNG* 

DOWN 


GoiNg 

up 


MEDIANT 


C5o/NG 

Down 

AdA(N 


SuTj AU* WALKS A££ DIFFERENT 

NO "TWO People IN 7WP WOeiP WALK T?j£ SAM£> 
ACTORS TRY TO GET FOOD OF A OtAfMOTER 

By figuring cur how hb/sh^/it wa lks - 
TW id TOU- tfp whole s^cp/ with rm VWC 


103 






























Why is it that we recognize our Uncle Charlie even though we haven't seen him for ten years - 
walking - back view - out of focus - far away? Because everyone's walk is as individual and 
distinctive as their face. And one tiny detail will alter everything. There is a massive amount of 
information in a walk and we read it instantly. 


Art Babbitt taught us to look at someone walking in the street from the back view. Follow them 
along and ask yourself: 

- A & THEY OLO? 

- y om&? 

- l/WAT-t 7H6J& FINANCIAL POSITION ? 

- State of health ? 

- AIZP TH6V 'STRICT? 

- p£RMt$SiV£? 

~ HOPEFUL? 

- Sad? 

- 14 APPY ? 

—■ PPUNfP T 


Then run around to see the front and check. 


So what do we look for? 


The big eye-opener for me happened like this. (Unfortunately it's a little politically incorrect, 
but it's a great example, so here goes.) 


I was in my parked 



pheral vision I semi- 


consciously noticed a man's head walking behind a wall. 



i 



104 




































It passed through my mind that he was gay. A gay walk. Now I'm quite short-sighted - my eyes 
were focused on the ignition key, and it was a busy street with lots of cars and people - and he 
was about fifty yards away! Wow! How did I know that? This is crazy. All I'd seen was his out- 
of-focus head moving along behind a wall for a split second! 

I started to drive away, then stopped. Wait a minute - I'm supposed to be good at this. I'm sup¬ 
posed to know these things. I have to know why\ I remembered Art's advice, re-parked, jumped 
out and ran a block and a half to catch up with the fellow, I walked along behind him, copying 
him. Sure enough, it was an effeminate walk. Then I got it. He was walking as if on a tightrope 
and gliding along. 



Now how could I have registered this with out-of-focus peripheral vision at fifty yards without 
even seeing his body? Simple, really. There was no up and down action on the head. Try walk¬ 
ing on an imaginary tightrope and your head stays level. No ups and downs. 



i p> sgew 7 ws - 

G LI Mt/Gr 
W£l£MTLaS£/-y 



fiNO IN A. 
COMVEttVOHAL- 
STEP ^ SOW 
R.IS.E S UPONdhe. 

PAss.'Nfi vc&tnoti- 


From then on the first thing I always look for is how much up and down action there is on the 
head. The amount of up and down is the key! 

wonm orm w take short steps. ih a straight une - legs cpse imm&z = ume up dom on ih BopY 



As opposep to Misrm macho: 





105 



























Women mostly walk with their legs close together, protecting the crotch, resulting in not much 
up and down action on the head and body. Skirts also restrict their movement. 


Mr Macho, however, because of his equipment, has his legs well apart so there's lots of up and 
down head and body action on each stride. 


'Tgf'JDS 

-JZ? 




aJ Heee 

COMei ibe, 
g xpRgm 
TfcA IN - 


(£ur) 


VitCm TURN A Vi 
MASCULINE WALK INTO 
AN PFF&NVNATS ONE 

ju sr gy ova£. 

itte T%ETACHGN. 



GETTING THE WEIGHT 



VY£ pONt GET WEIGHT A ^AOOTH WWNT 

When we trace off a live action walk (the fancy word is rotoscoping), it doesn't work very well. 
Obviously, it works in the live action - but when you trace it accurately, it floats. Nobody real¬ 
ly knows why. So we increase the ups and the downs - accentuate or exaggerate the ups and 
downs - and it works. 


rrs t m up and mum posrra & yajfc-AWSSES w &ves> y 'ax the idling op weight. 


WEIGHT" 

witEN m m> 
patti 



wm its* 



m a 

"WHi^e web 
Nowmn* 

ON |T 

vpt. 


TV^i 


mo 

we Set 



caiw&c 


ifi'diF PC¥M pDfiiTIDN WH^ THE U£iSP AGE Sf-NT ANP 'THE SOY MASS IS PGWf/- 

whepe we 


106 




























Before we start building walks and 'inventing' walks - here's what happens in a so-called 
normal' walk: 


nf&r We'lP 
MAKP r HE 
2 CONTACT 
PC&ITIONS - 



Cohjacy Contact 


In a a (Ofttoi., 
Conventional- 

WALK. 

VWf? arms At ^ 
ALWAYS 
OPPOSITE 
To THE t.£dS 
7D <5/V£ 

balance 

AN 0 Tf{RU§T. 


pASSflte- FDsmc*f 



A/£*T W£tb 
PWT* TV the 
PASSING, POStT(CN~ 

- THE Ml DPLE 
POSffiON- 

BP-EAKPom' 
-THE 

HALT-WAY 
PHASE 


f SH&rtLf HIGHER' \ 
vW/W M'D-RPWr / 


&K.*Ak$E THE LUG 
IS STRAIGHT UP OH 
WE PASSING PCS WON, 
ITS GOING To LIFT 
THE PfrMi S, 

body ;W head 

slightly 

HIGHER. 


\ 


N&.T Ob/ues we 

7>0WN POSITION " 
WHEPeTHE 

Bent pm 

TAKES THE 

weight 



Anl> Just to Complicate 

i-lFE * W A NORMAL WALK 
THE A PM SWING IS AT 
iri W l PEST 
ON The DOWN POSITION 

AN!) NOT ON Tfk CONlfCr 

Positional web Prefer - 
Wfe CAN IGNORE THIS 

AC WE PROCeeO .but we 

MIGHT AS WELL UNDE&Smb 
THE NORM &EFCfT NT 
START MESSING ARGON b. 




107 






















Next m Pur in 

THE UP POSlTfOH - 
-The' 'CPE 



Tht- tCOT PUSH iUG OFF 
HFTS oh* pELV/S, 
BCPf a*vc) HEAD UP 
To ITS HIGHEST FOOl TiCN 

-Then i tit i&6 i%THRom 
our to Catch us O/v 

Tkt CONTACT PCQlTOH 
- So WE UCHT FALL 
OH OU{Z FACE. 


LETS SPREAD 

/r Our ANp 
FXAGGePaTF it 

A LiTTL£ MCPT 
SO ifs 
ClSAReFL,,, 



CCHT.KC 


X 



IN A NOKjVAU ' (ZFAUSriO WALK _ 

~xk & weigh re ces (pqwn) 
7 ^ tit WEIGHTooe^rup) 


Juir after Tui stp - 

JUWAFJFTTf CCHTAC-T 

JUSTAFtbETU PASSiHG PemCN. 




Contact 


/Hgprt/vT 


l&r $mi>$ 
AgsopBiNe- 
71 A F£R£ e 
cp Tii* MCftP 


PAii KifTiai 

(& 01 H&- up) 


%t PChjM 



"T/te UP 



Contact 

M EPiANf— 


108 


































r 


v 


$&T THE TEMPO ) 


'the Fimr mm rc> to in a walk t seta beat 

(RfNERAUT RAO PIT WALK OH I 2 J g - MARCH TIME 


% 14 T PAX)' animators botfrUKE To Vo iron ITS. 

ITS HARP TO Pi VIDE up , YOU HAVE To USE ' THfRPS- 


HALfa Second phk stbr \ 
two RTFS Pep second . 

THlHK RARTP/ IN THR^. 


n / 4 21/0/5 



THe f M EFTVSFiiO AFF GoifB To BE OH 7WRW\ 



OoPS'-rtoW H/HPR)= JD W£ PUT “fftsifcWW OR djP:' / 
tfisy, Trffft &HH7N# HAS-D -^rectwx 
wHm we 6&r into the Am$ anp imhap,. Md 

'Aon 145' AND PFAPFFN —fMVBE- 7H&RI& AN 

FAS)EfZ AT - 7 


2E 


s /i/M HAS miP WAV - HAVE Him/HPR, WALK ON i&S 
MUCH EASIER. IO WALK ON lR Y — /TS HA6V 72? P iV / UP 

4 fat step - % 


— OH WAAK OU g'S , 
-SAMETHINQ ON S ! S. 

r 3 steps per sec. 




V/tf&W, THAT MAKES LIFE pA^ES- 
MICE EVEN PlVOiGNA Nc*N - 


{ E^PUcep UP AN p POVV/M ACT/OOf'S/A1CE\ 

( iT5 1A£iNG RvACfc ifsj /\ sHopJ^P-- T/M p / 

.si* 

THK K WW/ W7E0IV WAUKS Afe CRHA/ PN £c 
(5UMP, Bk'Uf, Bil/HP, S TFT A SPCCAP. 


109 












































y- 

SO, WES&TABgkT' 


KL 


& 

f%AM£S -~ 

8 

FRAME- S = 


FIFA ms ~ 

iG 

FRANKS - 

-JO 

flames ~ 

lA 

FSAMi sS — 

S n 
-..o S* 

FRAMES ~ 


b SSfzpQ a sbcoh b 


A ve/ey fast fun { & a -s blund j 

A nun oe veey fW walk (f-4 stm a s^coai d) 

Stotv ItUH OH x CAi>TCCH' WALK (3 St£PS A SFGONjS) 

BFiOK f BUSiNF&O-LlKF l WALK— 'NATURAL- WALK fw SjfPS A Sf=QoHb) 
KrLOWING WALK - WORK LFiSUReP/ ( % CFA SECOND iWR 

Etp^y oe TfeD Person ( auwst a -QzcoNb pffstfp) 

Slow ovlp ( ole lf-ff per., gfconlj 

,,:<$HOW A\E 'tie. W/W,,,,TO GO HOME 

The best way to time a walk {or anything else) is to act it out and time yourself with a stop¬ 
watch, Also, acting it out with a metronome is a great help. 


I naturally think in seconds - 'one Mississippi' or J one little monkey' or 'a thousand and one, 
a thousand and two' etc. 


Ken Harris thought in feet, probably because he was so footage 
conscious - having to produce thirty feet of animation a week. He'd 
tap his upside-down pencil exactly every two thirds of a second as 
we'd act things out. 

Milt Kahl told me that on his first week at Disney's he bought a 
stopwatch and went downtown in the lunch break and timed people 
walking - normal walks, people just going somewhere. He said they 
were invariably on twelve exposures - right on the nose. March time. 

As a result, he used to beat off twelve exposures as his reference point Anything he timed was 
just so much more or so much less than that twelve exposures. He said he used to say ‘Well, 
it's about 8s.' He said it made it easy for him - or easier anyway. 

Chuck Jones said the Roadrunner films had a musical tempo built into them. He'd time the 
whole film out, hitting things on a set beat so they had a musical, rhythmic integrity already 
built in. Then the musician could hit the beat, ignore it or run the music against it. 

Chuck told me that they used to have exposure sheets with a coloured line printed right across 
the page for every sixteen frames and another one marking every twelve frames. He called them 
‘16 sheets' or '12 sheets' 1 guess '8 sheets' would be the normal sheets. 

I mentioned once to Art Babbitt that i liked the timing on the Tom and Jerrys. ‘Oh yeah,' he said 
dismissively, 'All on 8s,' 

That kind of tightly synchronized musical timing is rare today. They call it 'Mickey Mousing’ 
where you accent everything - it's a derogatory term nowadays and considered corny. But it can 
be extremely effective. 



110 



In trying out walks, it's best to keep the figure simple. It’s quick to do and easy to fix - easy to 
make changes. 

also, in doing these waits - take a few ftps Acwm TUe, pat ok sotfn 



^DOH'Tj TFT TO WORK OUT A CYCLE WALKING Iti PLACE WITH lUe Fmi SLUING BACK, pic, 

THAT ALL BECOMES Too TlCHH iCAL^WF WATT OUT SPAIN FRfF TO CONCENTRATE 
OH AN INTERESTING WALK -PLCGLoSSiNCr FORWARD. 

y vte can work out a cycle tot The walk latfiz „, Perhaps just foe TGl Fper 

BODY. Bur THEN HAVTTtiC AUMs zttAiUe HEAP PERFORMING TFPAPMBLJ. 
CYCLES ARE MECHANICAL mH LOCK JUST LIKE WHAT THEY AiT ~ CYCLES - 

CHUCK JOHfC TELLS CF tHS TINY S’ Y0TL cU> ORANLPAUGHtFF SAYING, /f 

% CAN DAP WHY DOES The SAME 1 WAVE KEEP LAPP (HO CON J\t (SLANP 9 

/ 

Incidentally, if you are using colours as I am here, it works just fine when you film them. I often 
have a lot of colours going at first, and you still see the action clearly. 

Now we're going to start taking things out of the normal: 



-Thpffs a very simple way To build 4 walk- Start wnv just 3 DRAwm- 


FlRRT 

WF MAKE QUO 
'TWO 
CONTACT 

lot no/vs - 



111 


































pasq pod. 


Turn Put in 
'Hie MIPDLb pC&mOH - 

Ike PACING POSITION - 
eg 

PPE-AKOCVIN 



-THIS, T/M£ 

WP'PF RAISINS tr 

Hi&tim. THAN 
PREVIOUS!, y. 

W£'e£ /vwtfws rr 

Tf/g up Pc^mcN - 

-imfu&t. 

f 

i 'NeSfz omrm> \ 
I Tke SpHT M5G ; 
TAftflfil&e. WElSMT 

1 amp cag contacts 
\ WIU^ACrAS / 
\ i-OtV 


When we join these up with connecting drawings, the walk will still have a feeling of weight 
because of the up and down. We can make tremendous use of this simple three drawing device. 


£U7 LOCK WpAT HAPPENS iF W£ 60 PSW/V CM W PASSJMS FDS/ 



WP 6ETA VEpy 
DIFFERENT WALK - 
/T CARTOON/' A'ATK 


P4SS 



A0IV the pASmQ 

Position is the 

IX) \N ANO TUB 

Contacts, act 

AS THE i-f/SH - 

QTII-P CilViNQA 

FE0UNG OF 
We ifitf'T 


'HP CPUCW-. TplNO /S TH/S A'I/DPee POStVCN AND WHERE WP P/f IT 



Pass F.A 

pcs. 



squash 

V 7 HA SENDf 

-m a kidney? 



MOW 
ABOUT 
THIS 
ONE? 


FAtO 

ft>S. 


112 












Tfffgg CONTACTS APP ALLTHE &UT THEMIPPLE POSITION UTr&m CHANGE WE WALK 



WHAT /F THE FEET SWING OUT SIDEWAYS OH THE PATTING POSITIONS? 


ANP 

mim 

STRAKShTPV 
~TUxz fSOpy 

ON Te. PASS 
Positions? 


Ol*~ JUST TILT THE Li LAO AMO SHOULD&& -S/PPWAYS QV THE PASS F&SmcNS - 



THE KW thing 

(S IVf/jE^F /X.' wp 

WANn& Par the 

/Vi IPi>^ 

Position ~ 



/VPf 7 £> MavTiO/V 
HW '/VP 6w pc 
W/W T/-/e tfjEAD, 
WA/VPS, ARMS Q£ 
FEET- 


THE VARIATIONS ART FMOTSO - 


113 

















AMD WHY SWttlb WE BE STUCK W tTH THE E'AM£ SHAPE? 


UQW ABOUT 
IMSIEAO OF fcA&fe 
The W HOU? &CT>Y 
OH 7b. Pa9> ros - 

Stretch it 

G(Np> 

FL£Xl6itftY 



LETS SAY 
ITt A UFA VJ06 
MAK -GCTA 

p^r oy wm. 


P&lMtS L$m^ 



Kbebihs 

—fOsCs 

Peiwis 

e&vst 

TriKo ( oxr. 


To my knowledge, I think Art Babbitt may have been the first one to depart from the normal 
walk or the cliche cartoon walks. Certainly he was a great exponent of the 'invented' walk. He 
became famous for the eccentric walks he gave Goofy - which made Goofy into a star. He even 
put the feet on backwards! He made it look perfectly acceptable and people didn't realize they 
were backwards! 

ft 

Art's whole credo was: ‘Invent! Every rule in animation is there to be broken - if you have the 
inventiveness and curiosity to look beyond what exists.' In other words, 'Learn the rules and 
then learn how to break them.' 

This opened up a whole Pandora's box of invention. 

Art always said, 'The animation medium is very unusual. We can accomplish actions no human 
could possibly do. And make it look convincing!' 

This eccentric passing position idea Is a terrifically useful device. We can put it anywhere and 
where we put it has a huge effect on the action. And who says we can’t put it anywhere we 
want? There's nothing to stop us. 


114 










For that matter, we can keep on breaking things down into weird places - provided we allow 
enough screen time to accommodate the movement. 


thi s- om 
Foe 

mSTANCp 




PtSiftA 



Wp CAN 

GO POWH 
To TAK£ 

7 w wm&n 

AND 

Stitt- GO 
H (6 
oh tub 

PUSH - O FF 


pR&ny 

StPANGE - 
Sl4T WM v NOl 
7SV IT? 

People 

po Move 


TtiiA t AfOttlO £& 

Ferny wipp - 
Put 

1H£ DOWN 

wnaet 

TH0 u P 

WCM-D 
NCPMAttt &t= 

-** ANp 

Bem rrfP PPG- 



Whfpf rue 

PONH PCPi VON 

was - pur 

A SrPAiOHr 
IN SmtlFFN 
But PFi-AY 
TH0 UFO 
(f&0&AWiC£) 


merm 


pas: 


Poz 


DOWIt 

£ 


Anyway, back to the normal: 


% WAYS7D PU\N A WALK 




P&/1&WIHG 
Hit CONTACT' 
MSTblOO : 

FiPST YV£ 
YiAKf tap 

contact 

PD$i 77 c/VP 

ThfN 
We Putin 

Ibt PAGING 
FoStTtON 
'UiCPMAi') 


PASS pcs 

•\ r\ 


paw 



c 





Tppn wf 

PUT IN THP 
POW MP 
1H0 HIGH 
POSITIONS 




ConTPC-T 



115 




















I've found that this contact method is the one that gets you through - takes you home, It's espe¬ 
cially suitable for natural actions - which is what we mostly have to do. I've found it to be the 
best way to do most things. 


Milt Kahl worked this way. 'In a walk, or anything, I make the contact positions first - where 
the feet contact the ground with no weight on them yet. it's kind of a middle position for the 
head and body parts - neither an up or down. I know where the highs and lows are and then I 
break it down. Another reason I do it is because it makes a scene easy to plan.' 


'I always start off with that contact because it’s a dynamic, moving thing. And it's much better 
than starting with the weight already on the foot, which would be a very static pose!'* 


* 


as exactly what the second system pops.; 

'This is the wav art babbitt often ftanhw a walk- anp it has 
a vbny cumm thing to it- 


^7 

/ - 


Start off 

WITH THE 

pom ftsmoNS 




\ 


for. waNtofa \ 

BETTER TfS.m \ 
VYE 'U- CAU- IT 

rk Porn fcsmctf J 

METHOD. 


NOW PUT l 

I'ke, Passing 

PCTiiTcH - 
- FOFNOW, 


ZlGHTiN THE 
M ipOuF 


DOWN 



UP 

pom ^ vown 

O 



Now weve GOt 
Both the up 
AMD THE vomt 

COVERFO 

IN JUST 3 PRAWtHtSS 


ttr contact 


AND ONE OF OUR 

Nbkt aaid -positions wilt 

m the contact. 



I although its \ 
Kind of awkward 
"to NetGcct> 
CONTACT FG31TIONS . 
THI S WAY - 


i 


116 















The cleverness of this approach is that we've already taken care of the up and down in the first 
three drawings. Of course, we can put the passing position up, down or sideways - anywhere 
we want. But having the downs already set helps us invent; it gives us a simple grid on which 
to get complicated, if we want. 

We know it'll already have weight and so we're free to mess around and invent eccentric 
actions, or actions that couldn't happen in the real world. 

Again, we're not stuck with one method or the other. Why not have both? Not only but also ... 

I highly recommend the contact approach for general use, but starting with the down position 
is very useful for unconventional invention. 

From now on we'll use both approaches. 


!rs k/mp of academic, Bur if we take both methods^ 



Ani> push them together 




CONTACT M F THOP POWH PCS- M ETHOP 








- W& GET APLIhoUP Zwl DOWN PHASES OF A NORMAL WALK- 

nc tu s Am 7H/M&, wp'eg just sworn off one phase earlier at one hmb later.. 


117 






















































rs 


rtas* 


P &U&LIE SC^C-WCjE 



'Truckin' on down.' The double bounce walk shows energetic optimism - the North American 
'can do' attitude. They used this walk like mad in the early 1930s - lots of characters (bugs and 
things) all trucking around doing jazzy double bounces. 


BF IpEA !<, Z ?m SWP* YOU BOfA/C£ TYV/Cg. 

yOU GO DO WN (oit up) 'HAliCp /NSTpAD Of ID W STEP. 


9 f\ Y ilk A (6 R 3 W STFP (pH oHeS Pee^SJ* ims&s A ujt eotK&cN?) 

siart w/th bpvt cpwa; - mg uass apa p- foiz. clarity t 


PM& POL 

17 a i 



rwmw-pyfls ffc* 

/jV-fZieMJAHLE 
PPT Also poWfi 



t t 

add iN THP AiPJCT"TWO M'P■' 
tjf ~ A5 TPA‘ ff/<s+i £, 


,At>D itt 
"Pfe STgpP/Afe 
Foot - 




cfM-Rr (5 w iv iL ■ 
13 P, 5" / 

j‘l i ( | 1+1 f'H ) '> 

' li; 1 5f 6 •( ? * 





118 




































































/ MAD&7WS P0U6l£ Bouncy WALK BY COMBINING Hie i\YO APPROACHES, 

l Dibits straight l-eG contacts first, Biff also made THm w row -ike town. 


THIS ISON QN&S- 

WW 6 me step 
C PA walk on iz's 



4- t y f 4’' 

Contest 1 pass Rre cower 
pom tip jpom wP 

1 + Z JO 13 


L. i 

1 | i , 

T f 1 

[,, ,i 

f r | 

2 

yin 

-1 j. 

e 9 

ft & 


The IN B&TW^iS ATB CM 
-TtitdDZ -liNfDPTUNA'igp/. 


#!3 DOWN 


#1 PCWhl 


comar 


Cohrtf&T 



comTor counter 


119 



















































U0OSEN/N6 IT UP ) wa/AW , 

—-- FfcRW \ J 

%SH 0 WUD® 

1 6 REWARD 

We“l4- SWT our W m-f 

THIS S m-B WAi-K 

— N'O'TfUHS' FANCY >TT 

TttfMW NORMAU-Y WIUL 

Move oppos rm wrm 

- ?ut £lMRLY Si H(\m& 

'TkizeHO uppers 

OJPFDS/N&TH^ f~£&S 

WIUtQVg ITMOR^ WFf 


WffENA^A 
. (SS^CK 

t? BACK 



f ppoNT WPW \ 
( PUH-IH& If APART - j 
V por t’UAfci ry 7 


MOW ITT? 

TlUT um SHOUlPEK 

pop. OCMP 

VITAHTY- 

tve'ee iakjng ou£ 

gAifO PpW MOW AND 
APPWO IN TFf/NSS 
TO Stfll-PON 
T* SYSTEM- 



Now ITT? Vo SoMprH;M^ 

W iTfS IVfP MeAP 

lo MAKp THIS SfMplT 

FORMULA vYAj-K 
MOI& 

iNrpRPSr?NO - 

per? Tipr-mppeAD'. 


HJFf 

■^\D 

<SR< 9 ulD 0 ? 

klN£ 

<?f>PoSfe 

^ EACH 

r oTue 2 




PA&|N 6 
PosrrtoN 
KIPS AMP 
MM&&S ., 

WMaspoRfBa 

£TRAl«fT 





120 






















































tfowA&JoriHls? 
ms p^i-AY 

Hic-TiHOF^HeAD 

OM 'fke> 

passing ?omc& 


pass pas. 


PASS f(S, 






PASS p# 



U^S Dc? 

6 DMFWN& £PSg 

with-WH^AP" 

sTic-ki^ W oar 

cN'ftte 

p&iNfrP&SiTioti 
/&ives A SwiSHf'A 

( F/G®tf «r*cr y 



SnAU, 

P£*AIL tWAT< 
plFWW 

WfU. gjvf a 

WflOF IF/FF^T 
F^uNS- tz> 
-iufb&MilA 


Q£) 


TUEH&V sa/ 

G^ES FofcV^gD 

Awo £0Ml7rt l/££ /r w $ 

At W <SD^oar 

S?A)P> QFTHf SrFf 


PASS PC’S 



BACF Flew 



121 


































































ANY Y.M-IM Pp1/\'L Al-Tf=jSS A WAUC 
l M<£ MC'VfNG THE AeAD Up oapowa- 
Cf' TIUT I'YcY (t f-;YYY4 AOO TO Slj>jE - 




) 



Li ^ 

T"K 


^ 6 oTiStS WOBBLE. Ueao 


up PA& ft* 


^ YNi s &0 TklS A LCT W/ 7 H 
r^HT[C/A/\!^ flCroR£ op p££jpi£. 
WHO (AVVS/Ne 
TKf Cv\M££?*\ (S 04 t>fi=rv\ 
W-i- Tf-fE? TIM&- 

Ac?M£ COM^pHAAtS ft? (f 

WH-en THg'Y ser A &i& 

MtAFNOE EESPoNSW 

'N Mou-Ywfcop 
fVjS ££V£W seen 
TH- e AAAU-MAN 

poiyo /r 



Asp 


Fi-OAriNQ , 4 1 -cMS- 

in I—Ovfs with rrS£ 7 -.F 
VT 5 WON , 

' /o 30 W OHp&zfUt- 

WIW- lA/C^F W [££LY 

W /Tf f 

-Ybr /vu{OA up^P pcw/u 



£M 6 HT Wp 


PUNfr 

POWfV 


) r -L-:W f WAS A J<lP 

/ always; n/crtc^a? 

VVU-y AMfMAT&fes pfcW/ 
HS 4 DS PiKETH!? — 
W»TH CONSTRUCTION 

HN 0 c; Q\ . 



NOW i KNOW 
WHY — 

tl ! , 4 N(Y 4 

MAS^s 

AU-THO T 74 l£W 


122 





But a caut(Onaey mz neoM ken haeriS: 

FOt WA-EK^ PONT MATE CVd^ OF gOPY AMP HEAP ACTfON 
IN OfSCPEO TP FlOilRF 0'£ - 

fF Fou Do IT WILT P20K UKF A p/RD OR PlSFCW WA/-K (jO'iTO Yoi\ wJMit 7M4T. 


4- 

Fop SA-fFTY KEEP THE/MSS’ 

* m ostp/ sr^iAriT aPANP bom, 

X 

Pur gpAeiM6 TNft IN MIlVP Wg SHOUtOSriU- BP 8EAYP AW tEY THlNiSs... 




gUIPPlNS ON OweBASlC PLAN, wWpNM^APPW IN ACTION - 

IN TPg-HPAP, SK0U,Lpgf2S ( ARMS, Y+IF5 ANP F02O' 


NOW pgTS 

BgNDTHE BODY 

C>& tHF mESILfW 


Kfpp SrRFSffr 

„ ON THF 

PASM^ fcsmoN 



AMP MOW WF(OT OC'fAiOTO PoTH/NOS’lT T\t ITOS WARMS THAT POOKC WFl'RP 


123 
























Gam To 'BmP Tie Lf&. 

Q01N& to bw> it whtvhtr rr wculp sm> that way <%ncn 




W£R& pOfKG 
WHAT* 

ART eAPBiTT 
CALLS 

5K£AKfM<3' 

m JOIHT 




op ca>/Z$E t m 

1&« SAM£ i'tsH&H - 
"f ke CAiP/T/ME 
if cNANGfSS (5 
vVH(?N IT? 

IN 

P£RSpf=CffVF 


WE'VE TAKEN 
A WA/VWfR 4NP 
' g pcKEW' iu& 



ft LOPHS WflRP ENOUGH. £urlFi4£ PEAW A gAUfT PANCPg OMTOPOF IK iTiOM> 

J frST FlH£. 




mcm 

TAKfe fHCp$>iigl£ 
U%WX\F6 WflH 
Ih. Uttbf&lXING 

^rfmcniRF 
Qf we wwt ro) 
Amo ft \nil-ub 0 

m^FOV/ 

Acc^PTAB^ 

- eepEC/Aay 

/Af McmoA / 


124 









































WHY AR£ P 01 HG 1 U&? 

d om isto 3prMC££ ch. ambe, w/tty/y 

TH£A£710AF 

TO L/M££R 7MIN6SL/P" 6£T AWE UFB INTO it 


Grim Natwick said: 

‘We used to bet ten dollars against ten cents that you could take any character and walk it 
across the room and get a laugh out of it. 

'We used to have about twenty-four different walks. We'd have a certain action on the body, a 
certain motion on the head, a certain kind of patter walk, a big step or the "Goofy" walk that 
Art Babbitt developed. 


‘While the opposite arm naturally moves with the opposite leg, we'd break the rules eight or 
ten different ways to make the walk interesting.' 


\tfdu me- iw mpw/wd M>m& in &fiu> upch hb sysim 

Say' m mme a kjnp of ams^y wm-k - vye'p no^maw-y po miSr 



$tlt UDK WHAf WHfiY WF DO JUST £ TUiN&B - 


PUT 141 M PQWN 

ON Tti£ FAS:SlfM(5 PC $ tT"CN 
/vys^i N& HK 

bach convex 

— AND bo V4H 

W(T1+ Tlj£ ARM 
THE ELgQtN* 






125 







LFT& Tfrk£THt$ ANG£y WAU< MUCH FLt&HPIZ- 

/S TH£ KINO OF THING ART plf> Ail HtS pFp -■ MAKING tMFDS&iBCE MOVE S i-COK 

CONVINCING a^cJ SFHIFVABcF, H^P SAV/^E A Him-F BIT TlZtiTHFUU"., 

So IT DO0SNT-JU^T i-COK HIKE OlVB&TEP REPEAT!N<St VHF SLIGHT# CHANGE The, S IBHOUgTTE 
ONikc 2«P CONTACTis) SoTHFCOUNTFF ARM POSITIONS AI<F PIFFeRRTT tPCM CONTACT 

ON The contacts The back, hfg is ''Broken' A H p-Tt foot swivecrep &\ckwA£ps. 

Hp'S OH TWOS - EACfl STEP TAKING IA FRAME S. 



Sack arch gevs^saa l> ip^p/^r A£/n ros/irew backapqi foot sAC-m^tx mJ back 

ft&MTiepZgHtCiiS contact FFVmSsS ARCH RfVKFSRS fFT MTW 
- .SACK ApeH F£¥EF?£$-. A6AIH 


Shaking Ik first step pown further - 

Pass fts. 

I 2 5 T 9 


a 


S3 




CJiftah memT) hand 'breaks' Am'szEws ' /vw snw- 


NOW Hie, OPPOSITE STEP 


Fbar SMV9S BACK. 
Burt’ is at irk nmesr. 
BACK ARCH £m=ES£S. 
RXTSCCF FAC&AW& 
FBcn{ «s, 

Both msss go siwwa?r 


s«rr F/M>'ASff-f 2 
COVTASS GfScUNPr 

gapy twss aw 

fSDM MS 
CAOSfCT FOOT fS 
£?W t 54 CXWA 2 DS 



The Am S WANS' J 25 ^mV '8mK- /VVDiK fi*7T Sl/rt VSS BACK FARMER -TUB ftSTT CFH\<l PATTERN t$% t, SWE- 


126 
















































mcmHmtit on a fpofoo wath ft to have oho foot 

a LiTTLF rn -FfaoNT - AMO M6LOO SOFWAVO A B/TOIV^T^ K&pmrwM ^ 

( ^R2.y p/ASpAmtf(Cvu-MM 



L&rS KEE P TH4N& THINGS OUT OF7FF OFT iNft&Oj - 

WHY NOT A £Umz PFVFKAW OF THE UFAH.O TOWN OF A HomAE WAIF? 


PHi pcs 



&VLL \KzZPlH 6 TO OUT- 3 MAlH pOSfTlONO 


m 

m 


THlT IF mo 

t> ur a s i i 

OF PiNApy 



40 IFrOTFf 

owimHO'm 

KNEfS tti 
CMJH& 
PASWYO 
POSITION "' 


Ptf£ ^ 

POS 



F05'f 
FU>PS 


127 




































































































7 \60 lH6 Pefr&Z INTO WAM<$ [ J 
A- mv OF strut: 

U?rs 9&t£>'lUe BOP\& C6TTVVAPPS CM Tte EXTREMES - NEAPS, SHOt P^$, H-fPS TlUT^P- 
ruriTie PASS JN6 POSITION TOWN £WfN£Jfal^JNWW& SUPR5RT 

- Kind OF KMfXK-KAlERD - THK'W- OHF AN iNT^StiNS- (^UpT 



apmK 

THP 

Supppp-T 

Ppta" 


NOI/V TAKE TH-R SA/XE RXtP^YIES ANP PUfTlte PAS5fMG POSITION UP AND WisT- 
^TRAkStfTRN Tk SaPfbRf «e To LIFTH//U UP AN DBWHG'jkul¥SS\HB i/NWA^S 

as PR&ymuy. 



<S/V££ 

a vaay 

DipKt?R^ wr 

RefiUM" 


£UT AMKE 1 *tt M£XT RR^AKPOWN PCWN (As No*/)wA W rftflfcc AM@Uf 5 &^WW^ 
3^1kOTHER $^AKiX)WN W COIftlN-O Fo£ WARDS < 1 fW gODY JUST //Vg^TwQa \ 

- EXCEPT fOCTk y 


128 
























yv£ CM Go Qti fvmEP Iff IS WAY, BITS AN£> B(M IlCHiHG 7 fliNQ£ AftxJAD 

CM CU£ g A SC S OPAM/H& PlAi V •• 

tfova A Boar THIS? K^p tUt SAMf '2- SiApPAfe gur USE 1 W KPHTl^Gs mural. 

Fwrik pcsm s ftxrnotf up, 



wpA-r wife tey/m& To par ovpr k a way<sf th^k/aks- awt it . 

A £/MO£ GfclP DA MflCg 7£> BUW> Qw/fiE NORMAL WACm - 0/2 W/ANW 

ONS "AND ACCHW Ug> B&fMmtt - 


129 




























H Bm A OF Fzmm WALK OH The gA£i<TFIG&££- 


Tk£ 

fttauW*# 
po Nor 

OPffc>SfS 
~U HIPS 


PfiSS ? 0 $ 



1 fi£ VA^ATt ONS 
A& I2NC>L£S%„, 



TW StiCULO^lS 
Aw P H^Ap OH ?&>$ ftX 



\ 



AMP | MABlNE WHAT 

w e Can G&r up to whe*/ 

WE £1Df p /*■% WF $im 
F^ATfWS \AA TlYfSTiN** 

i"He BcpV tH iM 6 £ 

Pi HE A 
SUXK- 



£Vtf\i IF TH^Aqro^S /MpoS£/BL£ (gje^fSNj&fdTS, £?c.)to Do^/fS AQODp 
IPgA T2> ACT OUT AU^TkeeUSrAFSS 72) S££ WH^TH^R If W \U~ FtT /N7D TH£ 7?M£ 

AU^ormx Viscarp a/ 4 -moasty an/> act fr oar 

WH-eN I ACHH> milt KAWF AScarA AW£Vm 0 i£S FC/VtA^ HVAlK AN/MATfC* ttF 

4Aip ') cw3Sj^rmeP£Oj&. $ut/F YodoSFFMm PoiKs ir'Ycvo HAW WMm> 

To }<&< M£ *' 


130 





























































17 


I 


[7 


5* 




<? 



up 



APART 

APPf M% 
AS AN 
! IM 

BUT jl 

Hi« H^H 
9 J K^f 
j ffe FEcJf 

fiat 


w cstr 





tWf«T 

FiAT 



131 
























































A 


.p sucutxmr be afraid iotake ueepn^ and p^par rmo>- espeOal^ fee fev^r achoj- 

fe>N C>(V£s) 




132 























,r 


/ /Vi !HCUXOiH& Tf'KS J SASKerSftM- Fi60fi& f AMAMTgD ■' JuSTTO £HO{N FCW FAR. We CAN 60 ( irwcpKfeD 



133 

















Ct-AJGUJSfOiV; 

Caw takc GRf&r C i Cfbtifs 
WITW FA-sr ACTIONS -tvm 
'-V 7fj Ri=AMS>T(C- f- l&Ll RRSj'i 

ts C/Bi/ious; that ropL g&uy 

fast actions you #aV£ ro 

MAKf? £ VgRV p£AW/N 6 - 
A R A^f^TAMrflFrfeTHft) W6Hr 
?e A H&LP 4t)AE>lKG MUQCL& 

or gr$jf& $ur not muk# asr ■ 

MILT KAtfU- 

V /F [fi PAiTACTlOU 

1 'AAKE £V0ZY PRAWNS 



134 
















’Hjsfces NOThiHe LIKE' TKyiAiG- ir J 

INNUM^SLE PCS?/E/UTTpS LXK'r 

jAT'KP M6r CcPYfME LIFE, ALpE MAWN&/1 CbMAiTTO/V T 

AMD fp we MAK&A MISTAKEf VV(^5 /T jOSC A 7LSI' A^AjKLG^^CFOf\lS 

AMfP TELL A<9 Ain'. HA/T IteTi ML ATU- FAU- QX Oae W-£S ' BUTl&e CWL f+ALF 
Of IfceT/ME it'll AL?eK' AND Kp MEW- 

YPEeT A RALE BpfsAKLP- - 



v 



i u>om i 

FU&THE& 

A£>wtf6- Hi 

5 m> 13 

L-(K£ 

7W/£- 


steaisw r 

SASKige 
ON 


b 


fcorfavr 

cmvJAfi. pe 
/ e MI3 




Lft?EAD or 

ro ire 


amp i-v£ hm/paIt Pane Anyth iajs- a kh ifc. leap pr lrml , mayse w ith s’ucff ACrfcW 


OA/Y^PLLr W£ Sj-fc^LL Kf=EP %t ASMS LEAD VERY COAlL$P/A7^£ /KA/^NT. 

7KT WILL TPRK oiY ttaoL - Surg?g&trFR WffHONfC APPEL T?TAT£of7fe££oAP C/YTaF 


135 



























































BACK 10 NORMALCY pecA gif- 




jm Hmi- 


T'k HER iS THE LEAP PART- 

Hie Poor is spoon mpy ,-J Folpoiak alono 

Ife Le£U LEAPS kdlUsLtfXuAl BOOT P&& PR/NP 
W FLOPS RpCWAPp - gyTTfce HP£p CONTROLS IT 

fb^~ WALKS' ^ RUNS - 

[-AXK'^te hfEEU RAT ON O^ CPOONP fcgr%z, FEELIN6 OF WFiStiT 
KEEP "ffie foot SACK TTU-NAe L/&T POSSIBLE Mom&vIT 



octew&e. 



AMP 

Ket-WaMit-/ 

ul3Wi$-fte. 

(ERCiWP 


PEL AY" KEfK 

pur 


ANJ> 

PCAPcpy 

li> 

ALWAYS 

late - 


V 


ROT ACTION 






Cftrt+teS up - 

i^ive; AN 
A&wneNAt- 
6 irornns 


+E- 



4 



3M10 

way 


tcTS 

i&e PaS$ uo 

0@er\ti A 
MOPMAU 
VVAi-K - 

9Tk^\HG 

vV ffH TAS 

carrAciS'. 

A£&Y irL \ 

VpM 0‘i ) 


OUT- 


FHV/5 
Tiit rti&H 


MiD 

way 


1WtS(4Urt 

PAfTFKW Of 
A MPRflMi- 

step 

swp/AIS 
From 7? t€ 

contact 

PESfnoN- 


kor /host 

“TO/AfcSS • 


PteTftO 

PCM- &U&fffVf j/P 
~ltu t-ow 


136 











































But Prn? stapr 

> DOWNS 

jit Kind of A 

^p*rf*F»^noK " 


WiTK TAP 
Pd$(T\oH \k? 
ZN 

oms. 
mc> downs. 




1VKJ T!ME /VW€ 8CTO FCi£{ HAT" 


HON Wfc 
DoWf HAVP 
Tb- TttiAfK 
ABbUrifte. 
UPS POVfiS 
ANp INF- CAW 
CONCEftTfWE 
ON POIN5 
~ /"A !N£?Y W r ibl 
lie FpFT 



TH-PK ADD |N 
SSpSAIOH-r 
l W EPiy/FENS' 
ANP WP6f~T 

A PA 17(0)10 
/PPEOWCH 
12? A WANK - 

W fAK, 
&OPJM3 ff . 





$HT 
APTS&- 
"jie Niger 
upd 

gegAKODW/JS 

3 AND 7 

- MOP£ 
CHANGE. 
MCE£ 

VitaktY 


pJAAYTFglbe 
LgAWWS (SftXAfp 


Mn it-t&Fcor 

WITH £ 
Fb&r AMS^. 


hPO H 

jNBFflA/^VS 

/ £©»£$& w MWP \ 
? 'HAT tti& Heel. \ 

i i-EACS and the l 
| Foot Foi4-£W5 / 

A*JE? 

WATCH ? 

THE AR££: 





ir< OSVfOtfS 
WpVE Oct Moep 

p/pg IN ir 

MOW- 


137 






























,V0W 1&V> MAKE IT 

' MOIZE SPfci&iTPf- 

MAKE S STPAIOH I 
As i r PdSPB OFF 

y MAKE ^ 7 STZA IGH T 

As ir covacjs 

ih moom. 


anyway - AP>> IN 

TrFAfOHT 

in gFmmk 

fXCF PT Kf£P 

‘TttpboT ‘SClT 
FUAT ON 

AAiP ^ ^ 

FAVftheTOUTT? 

FvA'f t-1 K'fr % 




t 

pj£IAy FOOT 


A 

FM/r fpot 

cw #a 


A/ow wf'vf (Sot 

30jKg CHANGES / 


(?ENT TOSfTAW 
-To SF/vr 
—TosnsAfcsf^r 

- TO SENT 


AtTTf^uSH SO FA ft 
Ttf/S /SNT R0NMY W 
P(FF5£s=NT 7WM W£'j> 
ENP UP W<W IFWelD 
^rAFFP F£CM o«£ 
GdNW METHOD. 


v/e'ye 6or 

CHAN££ ANP 
VI TAUT - 

Tut LEG AND fc0T 
PASS FAST ttw»«h 
TIulMIVOUE 
AND CUl£TE£ 
AT-ffe g€SlNN(N<S 
'jvi phiDjf 1 tester 


NOW Wf'oL FIND 

method /m tie 

MAP NESS - 

HEFE5 WHAT AET 
BAgglfr MISHT PO- 

ataet with same 

3 6AS/C P06FCNS 
gwr pur fbor on 




UWWE TM. PaSWNG 
PCAifiOAi A* fs v 

Bur 

ikt Hx>T on % 

MAKE T At ftxToN v 
gACKWAPPS 
A6AW- 



K >guAY 
E*cFcoT 


I teor oiN 


138 
























NOP ADT> fN 
'2- Ar £ ^ 8 

r 1 

5E. AMP 8 
APf? ALCO 
pCCANTPtC 



/ 

ZrizA im! " 
AM> tew*r 


■ifi 


f is jHfrw 




taggMiZm FMH!« 
IneSM^S Tte AK-'- 


WAf^/g , 

JWT, 
AHP Bt-fc W 
iVA? TAOS 


'v(;< WAV Or W0PK/N6 AtiP'TH(piKM& i$ TH£ BASIS' OF7T-f£ KiNOOFTHlH^ APS pip WlTh 
(+fS AsXFY' WAWCS. rr PAP A T^RlAfO MIYU/£KC£ OH AN/MATCR£\ 

ART A WAV? 5A/P, 

'WHEN W'AVP 6oTAM OpFD£OWtfY To fMVFNT- ^ YV£V£ AOf 

shz pawt tfspom f&R ir , 

T^Afs w/mt separates as from jAveAcnav - W£ cam 


AV A to'/' P/Of£ tf p SLOWuy- 


TgASS uA^CKaX 
sHf3/y^St( 7fft= /VWDD/-/3 


p PUTS ££>WN f 



- 13 


ACT AR./RRSe IT? 


... _r -?RP fa?r . -v 
K UPMS/ (A To S j 



jum&tt TH£ 

JPOIB NCRIV\AU-Yf5 To I ' 


javpaolchy 
poyvM//> jo/ 5. 




;P tHfA /A .HXAOT/-Y K/ftA-T 77-fg OM THE W^{ A PARK IS POW£ 


139 















an rt c i pats £ walk (jtrjc&p oh twos ) 

- — ~ 



0 N CHt& H£W- 
UIRIS Foot FAST 

to ' K 






TNe Contact 


AND 



( pgR. srmm^ step takss J z frames — ppr follows step takes 


i 9 F&ms) 


140 



O N i ACT" AN P* PN*Aj ^ £iAHT~ AN I (~ (jp 


l! 


// 


iiPs CAM D(p 7f-PS Z/V£ MOIV MtfCM SHOULD Wje fiP A©£ To <&> //V AW/MAT^i 


141 







































































Wg haven r yer Quite shown -m SfAOiHG m CMHionm oh a nc&jyiap walk - 

HERBK A FORMULA OPAOMG Foitm % COH VEN70AP WAlK OH IZ’S-C ^ *&&) 



WP 6fftsD 
VWU tffP- 

CONTACT 

ca?W 

INTO # 
iAe pcW >r 

e=A£p our 
c?P Ine 
POHH 

^Pfpjgp 

PASS Ft’S.7 
Bus 

Ga%J on 
iNT£> Aw^ 

Otror 4 

i^fiietino 



:. rr %O 0 AS 

A &<TGOi> 
SPH&\D OUT 

HK£ 1WS 

ear 

rTwP^AS 

r/N^ 
when 

ompmsw 

AS IT 
WaPP 
A~ 


4^ 8 F&AME 
VVAiX wsps 
^xAerty 

~fkt >Af-hT- 

PPaWVjPA 1 " 

w/th Ja$r 
£wape 

IN SpfWEfNS 



142 




























































Oft rtW#E, UK? 
G?ROt{ CffO 

ytl PA&H& 

■ y 1 . !?o£(ttQ}4 

' H&f&t 

ssmAr^eNfe' 


UA 

o 

I 


_ trM 


, ? q 31 ejfc 


3sr 31 


"Tj+fRP- 


/ 

: -» F 


a<(D 



/VOW 

<S7$P1 

-j& TWfsr 


tr ^ 


>TAgr ^VjTrf -fTU F*X>T 
j</NP Cf= OM SACK V/ARPS 


A\WEJ_£ 


Pbor oan'ps 

tA ff&zNS piRE^icN 



■ VA£lAHOH 

CN-tmS&l IE 

se^roFTH/Ns - 



/afeacrf «*e 

GftSUtVP 

Ttf £ WAV 


143 











































K^P FCKM*fi3 W / W WOW 7& fi&CT (S3FS fcWAJ - 





Ofc ms f&jei^e or^ere, ftcr* 



r A*VI? <t4 G- FcC'T £w I 


WAK/N& S4CKWRPS WfTTi %t f&zT OHI BACKWARDS " 


GpULO PO ft Barn mm CQtfVtmtifrY " 



144 













MAIN, WE C-AH INVENT WHAT POESN't TAKE PIECE IN THE FrAl W ORID. 

MT BAmirrsMo. "a good dancer invents, nk not naturae fop a Person it leaf 

I#fl0 THE AIR . ~ to soissots I nth t FEET AND THEN laud ON tnftz TOPS . ^ 
.•m OW PC ANYTHING WE WANTA& LONG AS WE MAKE IT 1 WO&C- MAKE IflOOK ReUEVABLE, 



145 



























THF WFiG^r SHIFT* FB9M ONP FOOT TO ANOTHER /N A flORMAP SrRiP£. 
gACH Wp A TOOT iT THRUSTS tHR WFjSffr OF OUF SOPY FcT-WAW 

amp to thf sipp oyb&thp cmmFoc-T 
AHPlktSmiilPFFS MOS Tiv OPfC££*/&a WfP£-M BUTTOCKS. 


contact 


Tfe TfcHW PftK ft*, UP 


COAftACf T&e.DTA'W P>S Up CcAITACr 



amd TaKeS 

Tu* W0EK-T 
0V32 lti£ ftOf 


?TPAf<sK1^S- PLAM15- 

gUTTKtMFr^P Tjul ftcf 
Pa ?5 iNtf l£& 

CA«£|5. Tte WetstfT 
TOPpDpcsfJ 
ITS SiJ>E 


iWtApES 
Tit WP!6Nr 
TcsTKe $(f>E 
oV£fU Tfevf f£*3f 


PLAN# 

SrMfGH-TWS - T&a K»f 
EMriSft Upfl£> 

PAGiiNS- Up£ 

CAiiSps T* i^eiSHr 
To 

(7$. S/PP 


TWWI5 

Itte Fbor 



146 


WE/GMT OVER. 
Hl$ i-PfT pCDT 


W£i6tfr OVER 
MS RIGHT FOOT 



















































ITl.t-% EejlteWe 

0ACK AW P FOffTH 

l£& 

TiW IS LOWEST* 




jVOK/wAuy-fw &Ft-T umf is u?wn with thh foot that \sPom 

amo uP with tht foot that ts uR 


ANt> 

NOP/MtCY 

T^ ShouLP^E 
Dp PoSE S 

-fa* PPWK 

ftff WE \ 

Caw vo imwi 
WE 14KE / 





147 































mi^'ifaL&uoamtR frees up 
iH itu PA2S(AJ& Pc&moH 

it& Hanj> is Arife. west" PaPt6 fife. a^- 





p ( ■ ■■ * — . ,,,, -.1, — >■ .-■ - ^ 

I iACOr A Cf/CAS i 

F£U£W A£cS 
- 

AfV ACacH 

1 5 W aw A&J f 
. J 

™ ■ .. ■ ■ — ■ ■"■ ■ ■■ — ■ ■ ’ » ‘|*T" 


ASTHP/ £ WiNG-Jo gMMtazIfaWttST 

Ot- JH£ WALK <'~& SL ARMS W //4-T-MO 
To ^/WA AAVtet/f^ 

PRV^ujm - uke fr\ov£Mmr. 


wfnrfUt ies 
flu. H£EC 
MAJNr^fw-s: 
lUi, ARC 


~%e WRIST, 
AAAiN"tAiNi> 
-ftffc AjC. 


M0STGTTxT?/v1 £ 

PA7F OFATO/f fS EfTftE^ 

Mf 4PC OF- A saw of 
FfGtlffe S' 

- 8 at x>met\m&> 
jkUGs'UAfi' oil. Srg.Ai<S(jT 



o just to makz MF^D/mcaa we sfmu> (zmm£R& that . tjctmaa-Ta Go^SM&ir- 

UE WMK - Tk e- AFM SW7J6 j£ AT ITS WiT&T OV Tfce' P<W fe6/7gqM, /VOTQj 



&tr 

Of 0*>\)p9r 
tor 
■ STUCK 
wnH 
TtfK - 


oonH 


(yte fos 


148 
















































Pm vo\ f m&k 5 > 

cm m bscap 

ofi p2Aefie/w-p/ 
HOH 'Pt'ClMT " 




t H(jl. 

OFf'fkv 
FMMAM- " 

TW/5T 

twtsr 

-He HMTP 5 x 


NOPN 
PP0RL£ 


P 



L°P. 


pwr m/e 
HAN D5 
M«oH 


* ££>: 



NWfBEJt&rfiJOV 
HeRElt> H^ag 



^ASOr-fEaA/^* 
P H Tffl£ 

ON AN aP 
pASS/Kfe 

PC£/T7oN - 


4 k f> powN 
ON ttte E?qrf3ewpS 



P/2- 5*AVi^ TWfAiS 
W/TH A RCWK 
pA&S/Nf£ 
POS/TCNf 



149 









































ff 0H A $CUT HAVING 
tkeARAis ^mrve 
OH 1\t 

duj)-&es 

A£M£ BlfsHr VOW 
ou.'ii ifc 
PAS?iN6 

p^rncw 

/ VV^+fCH i£ \ 

[jisq P&tfH) 


Hm$ A jM,h?i WM-K 

£>Q{N& JUST THAT- ANP A l-0TOF'1htTHlH&$ WB-'if S£^V Tk\¥-\U& A&ouT: ■ &£tf WN£ $tfcaU>£R> CPFC& W/pS - 

-TH-TlA^ awi P0-AY/MS wMp, TW /ST7/V6 SS=y. 



150 

























To GET FUEX IBiPlTY IN AN ARM £WfN'£ 

WR'P PRAV^ THE HANP- 


! /VWiNTfltHi 
TH-e Ap.C / 




ANP THT WtU- GIVE ti£ a Nice 

UTUE OVERLAP OF THE HANPS 
AT EACH ENP OF 'THE SvV'KC-t- 







■^fuja/6 TEC 


^//v^ 5A.6A 


a«d wh Caw Cter a gn 

/V\ORR pTPK IglPTY 


p|2op shcuider c« pass rf 


> 11 ^ 


propping tk shoulder 
on Ik pass poSmoN - 

MAKiNF 

A PEFPEfS ARC- 



W£ PC? 

fPWPP Vvp'li- 
PPcAK''(ce^p) 

Tiv. elbow Joint 

WH JhcP ir cook 
.felOHr 6‘p- IN Rows 
and whether lT 
WOUPP gPNP 
THAT WAY OR- NGt 



ANP WHEN WEOGME PACK/WETc'BRcAK" 

( Ae’MPj iT , AGAIN - A ipHCu&HTCo/NGr TplS fifty 

|T J-CORP QiTfTE 

NORMAL ' 

A NAruRAO 
TppARTR 
-PpNP. 



151 


































/* 


O, FOR GtFEATFZ FlEXisiury. 



BY the JOINT 

WE CAM JET MMEER MOVEMENT FRON\ 9l&M£tiT DMES. 
Wp won't hwe to j?raw m a m&e^iy cw^rcoNY way io Be i- /mw? . 


i-pTS MAKF THIS R6 ADV CLEAR - AO WF'ee Go/NS- To HAVE A LOT OF 





<TiJ 
OvpfepAP 
Jf-ie HAM PS 


£Uf WONT IT POPK CTEAMSE ? MOTOWTFF SCREEN. WHEW f/VSFTW^NFP ITS pRCf&BP/ 
Gom TO fSEfOR'4- F|2AM££ oRSO, Jfc OF A -SECOND, ‘TOC? Otf ICK TO'READ.' guT WElDF0^ 


j_ 


IT- W&-L FEEL this? /NCRJ5TTP Flfys&L/ry - /aicrfased CHAMGB, 

Soflwm AsKfP FPEP attain Mow on EARN HE 
CDuX-P PARCR ANP /HOVa i IKF tMAT - AND HP 5A IP, 

'OH, / Just start ey Fcrr/wc fctU feet wt&la/r' 

e«r if you a/val^je feet asta/rh ^ ex' framr 

YouTl CPP W ReS tReNKfNa JD/MtS AlPTHP T/MF 

ALL OVPRTAe PLATA. 

rw^/ i, t = 7 

ifi!Z Y ppRCpfJvTty CATLP fW'i T&e /-MHiAA/ MlPPPY MOUSE, 


I tmmlcf rrv& 
*TH|S EfcUBfF K /; 


/ / 





152 
























H&&S, AN Ap^ptftTfCW OP A ANIMATfcP FL-A M jgQYAMl /A&M 6 //V/NG 

g&ZAKlHG iUt croittis. him mao - 



OJTXer 


?2?WN 


HMt> LOOfS . 

AT Ni&S | 
OP * 1 

5WS& sn 1 


FfeaM "iht, siOh 


m> Gom back 


BREAK? N£r 

Nffp jams 

fofr NMATfNPK YOU \ 

WA ATf (O CAM'" / f y 

/S’ 5treoM> NABiRB 
-76THg^Xf^m. 

AN you /MVfeTS DOTRA? 



__r~‘ 4 v 


H 

/''Ui! 

' 


ryfm 



r 'V. 'fs?. 

■ 



153 


























l F (Alp THAT OtTF THE PRAVVfWO-S ARF £V#V R^41cmY - 

/T 5 ttAPPPR To ^ pA-STAW/ CHARM OR SrVi£ AfVP Iffg: 

Op TAP UNDp|2prtN6 iWyj&A&NT <X0\FFf, PVfTI APP/N& AW &PBMA- 
ppp/V\S 7p C-fapapp CPAPAdTf:^ A/VP> TApoW CAP Cfp TAP CfWSp f&fe 705 
0ipWOfp|GF\ AWJ? (tS TAP ST^iiOllRp H/pRp /TTtTc HlT?£p ACTING few 

rnmn praw//vss op pfsi&nc caw ccwp ;.atp- 
vYp caw .APTPp. the Timing cf an aR/m $wJ6 - 


OAV Wp M4K&" TP£ AR/vtS' OACWPR 

jve ANiMKfPWWAM ON 8 -s TWG 4* Sfl5p£ fPuir&> AW 


fp£ 



/VOW WfcU- APP THt ARMS ATT W&'U- PiiTTHTM O/V /£>$-■ 

oo wuu tap f&ftow 8V anP w asms o/t /6 $,the aw SiAW? takes Twice 

AS TONS A5 7HF Fett . 

r HF ARM £*Tp£M££ ARF Of THE S4MF pRAW/A/OS AS TFT FPFT ffOT OATf 7 TWO 
ARMS’ 'TW/N' ( WWATURAiT-y OM W SAME SfPF AS TfiF fTET 



■T~H is SORT OF THING IS NFRY EFFECTIVE ON A TAIN I 

■*■ 


154 


























































l\m pothe coMEftsE' 

WENl HAVE THE A.CMC PU/WP/A/C- AWAY TWC£ A£ FA^T A£Ttf|£P£6?. 
WP'O- MAKT THE iA/APK DN /6's AND WOZK THEAPMS &fi 8$. 
JAKE OPE STEP - (spfce&P im APART R>K CIA&uY) 

WE'IT H££t> MOAD (N££TW£FNS TO S/£HN TH<S ■ 



NOW A PD THEAfZm- 

the m feme popincm ape on l f c \, ^ w 


A&A Mi 



THK weeps Sm&TE- iNB'ETWmO - MUST Be 04 ONeT £K3ATT CF 00 MCE Am 
ACTON IN A SHaef SpACE OFT/ME. (JF<£ ia/onAwcpk cn A E*T SW& 


155 































































r" 


iXAGQPFATFD COUN /tf A FAT MAtfS lA/AAK 


g 


-ft a B-pMACH MAS 
MOi/fS UP 
As Ik. tCXH MASS 
MOVPS POWN 


I t?i UK 



‘yTOMAdH /MASS 

imo^/es pcwiv 

AS £t/P/ MASS 
MCVSS UP 





FtDMACU 

wp 

a^bow 

PoWN 



, 


w/fta/itfe CMwrae 6ot& up -the prapery or ha ir o£ soft bus: 



ASAum - Swrroct^s anp fpfasts Atn>HM& 

courier tA Bdpy upsanopowns- 

f? 


c 


poWtf 






156 







































































































V^R m EN D OF THRSp WAAK$ LETS LOOK AT WHAT THE ENL ($> WING,, 



A WOMAN WALK!liG 


Bari ocks 
m m im 

mixm 

op-tm 


i'W- 




Tte. SiiTwOW woaiP NofMAttT $£ 
CWTSRM> Ctt 7 m- Ptszm pc&twt& 

turn • 

-*T| h 




ib. MOj&Mmr 

o- iu p pAp&zy 

MOMENTA A/PV 

OPPVS^Tt^ HiP: 

\\>mi Tu- H IPS 
Move -lUe 
pfSAPe/Ry 
Mov^ ilie 
CTH0T WAV. 


t-Wfe 

umz 

OIK 
LAi' 


a a 12 . $ 

A- Z 10 & f? 16 


(9 


23. 


2S" 



uwe 


THtr wow 

P To WAAK A Smt&HT 


l-f *f-f- 1 -j-j-t+4+t'f 

A&M, SHOW (HE THESE TH/AiSS IN EXAGGERATED 

Fcm. iris ACCOOOiHG TO TASTE HOW SpOfflX OF 

Howzm ty wp use Ttmo peviCex^- 


■htfohp moms. 



art 


mm 





Fa$Kicn 
Mopas 

o(ao<£ 

R( 6 fiT 



AS R> 



AND 

6AU££*W$ 


157 










































HpRFs A BOmXLA F0&- A BOurfC/ WALK - ON S's 


f-fl6Hf5Sr DOVVW HIGHEST 

0N1HF ontm go<N& anTm 



th& mw arb srmsar 


\H iteSOc wnm W SYUlH<9 RIGHT AWAY FCm '/VATyRANSAi'THFY INVe/rgD some CHARMOdG IHAWC- 
'ZfftzCiAax WITH CmiPtW- Tm OFTEN DID this- the. CHA&&m WOULD WE A STfP-IWSV 
fCf tfp /IV 7&fc Affe fc>£ 4 To 6 mws SO, 7HPW ^)4C4p^Wi\/,A6Al4 2xMa\<& AW ltf&- S&P. 



PAii PCS . 
(iVc> up os. jwxM) 


emjACr 

i 


raps tip 


CoNTACl 

II 



CIAC& PAiS fbC 

PWN 


HdtDffce. *1 RZ‘ 

4f^«s 


> FP. 


•% PP. H-flKJ nD/2- 

4 FRAMES 


rfoup* fbft 
4 FPAMK- 


R2\ 


Pop£ UP 



HOLD rep. HO|i> -cp 2- FA- ? p3 

•1 Fft/VitM> & PPANES 


j - 


-jc’tfi -ce 

4 Frames* 


a FP* 


THpy 

MfSffT 

K»P 

GOlt& 
fcRSoR 5 
more Steps 
-ftteN fDP 
HER UP 
AS4i|\! at 
random 


7 fit charm of this £ irY 'stymsfp stiffness ' ihhrntwr though fr 14 in> hard to tkt^p on this a pprcach* 

if m Dot SWIC-H AND OVKMP AND Wi/ PA£n>, TMW6S Jil&r LOCK DiKF A P/FCf OF PASTTISoADPCeA mm 

cur-car moving arodnd. 


158 





































































A BOK8& WALK WITH Hit-HEAP FLOATING LEVEL ***HkvgUTT*J PELVIS ACVilELY MOVING UP TOWN 
wd FLOW SIZE TO &/££ AS IkoMAlM FEATURE, ThtgUTTACTION GIVES iTltn& WEIGHT, SUTJUST TO COMPLICATE 

Things we 've maleTle extremes with what wouu> normally sf oof pairing portion - ih^ 
'comor '/s now pass me position, of Coopse there are no rules, m can mu> from any point 



?mMv pTHTiOi 




&TFPNE 


How we maks Morntfi 1Mm we make ANomeK exizmz 

BXTREME N&E Wtni 7H£ With THE BUTr AT fit pQV-JgiT 

Burr Ar Ts Hm&r. and th£ arms atth&& widest- 



NOW THAT m HAVE "fta- H16HS SwJ LOWS. WE JOIN TAlTUP aj EFFlCiENTVf GET fSe L&MLT WE WANT 



159 

























































Hi£P£C A TlsetiNfO^ AIP FOU PLANNING A WALK IN PffSPpCrNP 


t F VY£ WA-Nr To \ 
TKHMlCAU ABOUT ! T j 




NOW W£ KNOW To PUT Ik TfffPP POST— ANP AH 7HL p£ST. 



TM^N APP PA5S/M6 ppSfTOlS efc,TM£ tlS«AL KoWT/NH,,, 


160 













































































HAVING<SONg Wm®i AU-IHiS WAW< id FdmuLM do,. Wb END UfMf 

-fee MAW /SSt(£ ^ WO TWO CHARAOt^S WAIKTI^SAMB, All WE CAN DO IS SW2AU&E 


A Sp&IHY 

AlfT 
\VAi-W ■ 
MKfe 



AMP AM Oi-DQT 
WQMfW 

mw WK61HIS 



A pRUNt 
HAS A PRCA/AM 
Kt&pm |N 
SAAAACe - 
■f ke Head 
IS us tf ALP/ 

,/ts trying 

To COHWOf 

as/r 
r 


pf2uWK' 
ME-vep stamps 

5T/PL- 

AkWAyS /ACVinfc 
A- MTTLR Scf- 



f« TimjN& fs 
V^Y pRITATfC- 
-ft* eopv 
parts 
H« je uyss 

om m 

f^HO TO 

iacwr 

iNPep^fP^py. 

IffTYVR 

l\ i-osrfltc 
C^TRAP 
Cotmeok - 




]F PRKiNAKT,. 

'mothers ppfpe' 

■si YeRy O' - a 

OARTFUI- A _ , 

CCS 1 

w' 



A FAT fVtAN S'fMiFARt/ 

6 upas pepiCAra-Y 
Wi<£ A Dancor ■ 



\ l?es 

T arapt . 



CFT^t 
FAT ON 

(AlSIPi 

OF7S._ITTj 
— HAS TO 
KRB?P ft£6f 
APART 


«HpT gAMWCMS 1&t SO £ Up- 

-ftft Wftdr HAS 1» PAUNC6 - pccppr Pb£lUfi S&PF 
WS7AWT WHfiSf WA CT&P Ottj£SM-VpS FALU/Y& CVci? 
WR REGAIN Cut iSALANCR- 



AM6RV VftUC- 
ATWA'/S tfCT ftx>r 
\ jHpout&u tO pcWN 

- V ' fast/ 


/ic’c^yr 

pawn i 


<AIWr£ WAW< 

wPOPe ^opypocps 

5iD£ T& s:iPT 

rptauy 

\HgApy 





0A(3lpS Hf2A 
CcJfV.ST/WTi-y 
■GfF 6ASA.WCF 


OV^FXA46BMrpD fbCf ACfiCU - f-IFT APSS Hl6H0t 

THAN ARUWT 






FtspT 
5fi3gftP AfMf V 


161 


























77 m/M r fS 50 IMPORTANT /rV Wft-JS s 

HAI2&& SAP, *£AS£ WAi-KS OM | 2 -'s - 
WPWKAHi-) THEN pVPp/THi HlxfS JUST 

20 MUCH PASTER OR 1C lf 

$0 much sram^im a, . 


v ~ ! L . rv« 


l 5 ^~TL% 



OtOlfe aPSTAf^S 
■ftL-Raof W7S FLAr-awJ 
Ute-lfcAllANG ffcoT 
gpNOS W p.iN6£2S 


Gptfc PowmiHac 

^UASH /VIcRpTMAIV 
Nop/SMp ON MIT 




VQ?|£-A tT-ME 
TypK 



“fat 

PWftiSEC 

THRUST 

iUSHTlV 

feRWARP 

TwHfc 

Tbpoffe. 

EoPV HAS 
"To Rotate 
pqcfiu^e 

Ovkk 

■ \0?Of 
Tit Hip£~ 

''tVAPPMAG 
SlP£ Te> SiPf 
T<5 MUKcp 

Pew (4 - 


AGaiW, irt hotjust how wy took- 

no HOW n%c Ptf&ctt F&L/fk? 

OAT 
HcHfUY 
HAPPY 
THOUSHTfUP 
TRUNK 

ommLY 

Q\a? 

ycuus 

Apt>m> 

surw? m> 

Hopmip 

coNFimpr 

£aj\ pathtto 

Cohceit&p 

fibrous 

lib 

AN6HY 

M/VIE 
INHIBITED 
M lUTARiSTic 
PEP&£&&> 

joyous 

OHY? 

Take A PiZMK Kept FkMPLP- " 

Tf APf So MAW PfFFJWtfr 
KW£>S— 

Ik sm p0iwK 

Ik- PA SOVfOliS OPHHK 
15e SS^PiTY/AlS WIK 
"Ute FYPAHSm, HAPPY P&UNK 
-file OpfT-C)F<^Tfj0iX AiyiHTC PjWlK 
i&* OVtf&f SRAOmS PCXATE pRUfi IS 

Ik vr^y pf6/vip/EP p&wo 

Ik V/OA£.£i SAvvA WCHR lYAiniMro A ww.) 

"k iHHt&ITfcp Sod&fY YMf^Cti 

1 k fwtwj pa/MK 

Ik SpNTlMENTAEISf 
in* F/l^r T7ME pRUAfK 

^h-'qjpc .' 


162 





















































76 Sl/M UP-' 


WAYS TO GET VITALITY I hi A WALK 



=- - ■ J .-.3.^=---.==^ 


mmam • n1 ,Fr *»* 


i- V ■■■ f.. I - : • — 


lean Tkt pops 

Z USE SlEAkSHT CW CONTACTS W PftSM Off /OTtfOf'/S 

(6c>fN5- pf30M <,tsa«3ht to EENT jg^wrroS tbw) 

£ 7W(£TiU<L £DC>1 - TILT ike. SHOUlftgS wd Hips 

HAVE TU<l S Opf£££^ MIPS 

EWIVELH* tf/FS 

jp flop it* knee iNotour 



5 Tilt Lit SPLT LINE FMCM&LL 1 tm LESjim LOWEST 

6 Flop ifa feet 

7 PFlAYiLt FEET AMP Top LEAVING It* GPOUNP 

UNVLTkt SETS LAST /NCTAHT I 

8 'Tip Tit. PFA\> OF MAKE IT GO $AC£ wb FqPTN 

9 Dpi AV Paptc OONT HAVE E/EPUHlNO YiOpKihG j 

W * TCmViLP- AT The SAME T/Mg. 


io NSe CouNTfiZACnoti - pat buttocks fleasis, 

DEiA YP£> CLOTHESi pwruss ( pMLOc. 

H SKm-ike JOINTS 

12 . mope ups > t <3 pom fs (fop mim) 

13 USE PFEpppiT T/MW6S ON LE&L V£f®±$ AfWS VL&U$ 

Hmp vmms pops Ete 

14- tw/$t ikt feet-take -mm off Tit parallel. 


(5 IF WE TAKE A NOmAL C HOPED ACTION. zJ AlWK 
CUf ONE VNY PART- WE GET SOMETH iNC 



163 































/ w AMT TO c L0§£ OFF ON WALKS WITH 7H& EXAMPLE OF A \MILT KAHHTYP^ STRUT 

IN K& CAREER HE ANIMATED MANY ENER&ETlC SUPEROfTlMRTtC 'CAW bO WAIFS. HIE APARmP 
W cm &NFD SEVERAL OF TU&F INTO a COMPOSITE one (uaHG A 6EN&ZIG FIGURE' not a CHA&CT&Z) 
"A 'MAQuetTETO SHOW lit. WORK PPCCgS OF A MASTER. IT& C SOTA1NLY MOT TO PPOYIPR YET 
AN01H& FORMULA, BUT AS. AM INSIGHT INTO HOW A MASTER WORKS 3Ht) WINKS " HOW HE S TA&S 
ON A SIMPLE SASIS WITH The CONTACTS 2>k) LOAPS IT WITH PERTH INTEREST AS HE WILLS. 

A A/P ITT FUU- OF OrUFFW^VE $EBU TALK/MS ABOUT, 


m$r m awck ■ 

7&e Con TACT'S - 1 <3 



Flcrm 2 -steps' 

-OH IAS 


RIGHT AWAY 

THFREk' LOTS GF 
VITALITY 

(NTfe. cancer 

POSiWNE 


i-pf^.s flspfto \raxT 

9o f'rs nice hw Clear - 





B&rUHE 

PC«aW 
wtfff 

LOW&7T L&T 


H&X> 

£u(*tTN 


MH> 

Wigs 

BACK 


i 

H&P 


} 0 tfmo 


(SacktM 
IS C&uSH 


164 



























TH£ PA65Pe?smais 


so //v //©a ' 


jtefcP 
T 'tlf-’K 


"XIvU' 


R>fWP < : tW<i4&> 

/ .s' Cdi' J ^ 


L-& 


P/^ FES*. 

il ffS*P1Wi£ 
Te#vap& an 



/Tff/i WOUPD Ai^pYMAK^ A (9fW WAP/CA£ /f/S 

V 



165 





































Z !o /5 


'iHgNADPIN'ftfG ' 

I H 7H ifflS) Lf-i- 

^ ' * 3 <"<* ' 8 f '/| «- 



(5 /t ii- 2* ^S‘ 

I . . 1. !..!..! 

L^ ^ -f M .J. ^ I ll ■ frl.l . lj. j [ J 

tir tZ \t \& i U a 


and y m cah bft m&te 

Gcmro Be Trtai&tiT Hu* 

fNgerwm/S" 

NOTMPCHANiCAL ONES. 

giXA/UPUi - 

WITH Kit MSr^fHgTWM5 
Tta £&HT l^e&K NOT 

jrwsr fN^Tvye^EP- 
He &PST (S • 

Korn %t ma& iu( 

[ S PACKEP WITH VfTAUry 
"CHAlM6 £'■ 

VoW/CpCAT^D Ll££ 
op Tfe. BASfOS'5 



CO/W3f 

25 


£cV-^ TlWtffSP 

-4" /Siw^y m3M «s 


166 




























Ttif&E S DFFW ITf CATFGOfclg? Of SNEAKS: 

f* 

0 ItaTP^bTC^AF SN-G4K 0 ^AOKvvAfpS SWFftK (f) ibTtp TCF SM£AK 



p* ' - 


&<CPY 

FsEiswp 

A£ 7fc.hcOT' 
TAt<E&Tfe 
Wtfi&nr 



thsn 

sopy 

ftiu-fifC 


££P/ 
FtJRWARP 
AS "poj FcCF" 

K^ene; e^ck 



'/^iOM &KPZg£S> FiYET 01? MlSCHiEF 

BW V6&CN (6 Ff2AM6S ft*, srtp - MQE£ OR-mss opposite 

5«>W UgfcSol ?i FpAM£5 Ft'Z ^Ctt Sir-! 7 To A EopWAaPs; S/V-B\K- 


OH TOES aft PWtyFHIf--'* 

OF H(M/ftef2S^PF 

JO Fp,-AMj5 - |2- f (3, W-FRWTS. 
WHAT£YH5 WE WANT , 

BeFUft FAST ONES ON 3 S Cg. 4$ 


A TRAD (T(Oli AF S/VfAK ffM A V&Zi OBSTRUCTION. 

Ttit v,m 7HiN6S Afe ~ 





PTSNo P0<=VT7of? 


Tht body cats back W forth * 

"% &OPY GOES BACK WHEN l^e-ftxT 
60 ^ HR TieARMi APKUSgP FoR&V^CF. 


VVH^N Hit FOOT SfFAWS *J TO\JTACK 
~C O/3O0ND, -flit g£?f>y 15 STI4- SACK'Jao 

1 ft l -i 0 ^o rc h£hD BACK. &&LAV&P JtJ&TA Um£ £if. 


ArTWftft^ FCCft OOVlrAOS TK GROOM P 

Ifc Ropy foucts ~ ooims- forward 

4S~fUi FboT TAKAS TT vVE/6HT. 

Haaftc BOPY Wipp SO BACK OS 
AS TT OFfFe Wf 6-0=5 fftpWAFT 


OsAlfACi 


AS MTH A WALK TtiFWB AKL 
3 i/v\ FGTANT FfAWfHOS 

Kkt- 2- Contacts 

ANt> A VFRY INTERESTINS 

PASSfMe POSITION- 


167 



















KeN HA ms SHOWED US THIS FORMULA FQKASCOW SNEAK- 

ir TAKfS Z Fg^r = ^AMES- I4 OFGCMpS Fc>F FACf SWF. 

£pN TWOS -CgqTorGTASS /TU-EP FYPN TtTTFFAET/NC ^Niep/VSTP O/V ONK 


CONTACT 


CONTACT PASS INC ft>$IT?ON 


I 




-ftuA^Ms pat 
GPPCS&ita PeC' 
THTf ju£r^AWNC£. 


U^SEACy 
very urriT 
AonoN 
/Nifc&AW 

suA Nam ps 


AW [AAAie 

Tie. re^r with 
gVSM APACiNC 


nm? 

EA PK 


HeW> 

T/W£ MP 

^uswfty 


eoey 

Das 

HEAD 





0^ 5S 



•I 


feet 

EVFM 


i 3 e i H u is is it 


t-1--1-_1— - 

i j i 

i .| —1- 

*1 * 


12 1$ u 23 25 2 f T 31 35 

■■*-*• H.^ > u — 1 |-«| 1 — u ] | 


ni A OOFD FXAMPNE CF CO^NTPRACTION-' 

AS HE MOVES At0N6,-tfe (HEAD Go& FdRWAFD and 1 &q HANDS Go £ACK 

THIS fSTN BAS/S. If WiUD WoFX NIC&Y JUST /N SETA/FeN /N6-"Tc3 PoS/T'CATCAS IS- 
2^ NOT AUOlNSr ANY FANCY SITS OF i/MFE-ACT/ON* 



1F Toe HANRS WEFT OPpN 
TWOtcPP PCOK FR16HTBNSD, 


OF COURSE WE CAN ADD ANYTH tNG 
m WAHT lAtfttiiN - SUTIHISIXFS^JqB, 
NiTH JUST 3 p/BAWlMSS a,J t&CHA&S, 

m £oui& use arcs ofcJ ust srmstfr 

mami cat iti&rw&Ns* rrcwoDK me 


168 






















p\f of eouF&t ecuU) ppmy pasts 


C^CGSO/^S HMP 
(SACK %o) LccfaHe P0MV 


STU 4 - 60 K£ 
SACK OH 
OTA AT 
Position 



com- 1 > Stay fuuY ow i^ 7 b££ aaph^S/m g 7 ? -fewffe&j'Mfi-os 6 Aktiok' ^ 



neY ffoN 

pfcDNir V/|^W " 

VA! 7 WN£ CHtW s 

•'.-'-Kb haPPeK^MS'' 


k/Hat about 

A 34 \I mi t 


fN 74 V/£W H (T 

PH^W/NS- - 

P^SflpCflVp, V0UIMES, 

4.1c . WHICH r£ WKY 
^OTSOFAN/MA^S 

stay in frofilb 

n> A ScoP lt>£A N 

i So FA4N iTtrll&r 

m pKcF -117 j 



169 






































ah ADAPTATION of a E/L-TTYTlA SH pAK ' 
rmPT AFF 4 PLMHIM& PPAmet Itt OH SF FPM& - {k£€CcM>s FFF ST&P- 



FUNNY, SOON A£ l/VF 6-1 Vf /T/W £YE 
fr 50Metf ctn CF&\~n& r&Bso w a wry ■- 

SeCOM/ES gNT££fft(MV6-Cf* A'ltSACXN^. 

xj stop pav/^6- attention ia ifie- 

M /VAK’My / OF IN HATS HAPP0NIN6 . 

C-fMPwe amPUH SAYS 1 pE/SOVALfT/ 
t£-/W$C£NP£ mWHTHlHOZ&FS 


2-3 

^PA&fNS'-ft&flow 

4* 


£F^AD 4pA£T- 


/ M IW \ 

/ A WALK ' 

(-flie ARMS'* 
i“ WIN6L |%/ 
i CpuNTer 
\ lit ftff 


TH£5£AP£ 

^'(i-KUlVUS^K 
H£ HAD ON 

-Di-f pf2AW;«0S 
5C IM MAKlNto 
A 6U&SAT 
WHAf UK 
CHARTS Wgpe 


f 


pirzism 


*6 

gKTRSHg 





fl ** /£ xii 20 2-f £i As af A ? 26 zfi 

, S’ — r -— 




IJ'T 


H - 


19 


■j—f 


'f 


AT 




Mo/oK A$> 

■f 2 ^ 20 3 , * x 3 +3?b w mKms 

.M.f-f-f- l-H 

' ' ' 1 1 1 COMLPfSE 

TRSbTTD 
&/fZNPf 


BUT LOOK Ipw emPF 

TWA MAN 15* UXKAT 

H IS CHANGE OF ZttAfc! 

"ftcAMOOMr (PF^ChfA/JS^i 

Tf/6 £ WHAT PF> Eguy 

CW6 " 



- Of&N&r FfcON\ CMPVfc Id OPPC&.FF CUPAm 15 STRAlStfr 75 CUPV£t> -fc O-PPX/fg efe- ■ 


170 



























WCfiTfl or /AiflsNSW & TPMm AT MY TCtiDCM SfllNO 

ronr MS SAT UPAi-THirfiT at*) AfV/MATgP A tjWCKS471££ Hi/Vi 0= f/f£ QS/WHA&^ 


/ P/D //•/!.<; TCRSO SMpAf\ AS a A! EXTRCKs l bv^~A/^fMAr/0W - KTMCH CA/Me o«r KiHi>cf 

FUNHy " <HOm HOW TAP WE CAN 05 -SHVH& PH&iT OH TU £AS’/c£. (on twoc) 


m$ 4i5jifS.r-.f5e 
K JuJ • :i ■• 


Snwmwg on 17-s 


-'Ike 


M 0 ft# r 170 N$ , 
« .'r!4E, 

v, •?'/ ■* 



- 









171 













fl A Atofe GD&W&/AV 5N W cW Z^s - i fo{L 0m Sy£p 


ANP 9PRTNP APART - 

f 



(m m HARRIS \ /re 7V/w 

! MAPE 7WS CvMJE 1 0F KW - 

J Not a I-&T Oh 

FANCY STUFF 
BUT FCfSTe 
JoP pep^y. 




•’?>! /9_ 
i Bfife^DOWK 


gPWFOlM 


NOTE 'fe FOOT SW/A/6S’ FAST s — A II 

IrtPoiMEff 'flu.. iWPPUp ANp Mosrcy I <-j~* ■ ! — t — j—,— 1 H- i A 
PUT* POWN 6 lN(£ 0 itY 3 i u 


AMP 

mostly 



a 

-/% &\<9 PAOVP 1WPO&H(NPICArfS THATTfffeSrtpMtP rMVp S/IV61S SF CCi ObfcS 


r 



*t?ie BbPV scs [SACK T^NIfe EcPY <£qes 



ponsHP/ iiT Samp 
PAtt^N as a 

PbpWARi^ TfiTAK 
BUT £ACKWAeP£. 


AST'S CoNpP 
OPPSSt 10=6 
AT I N A WAFK 


'MlBpPV 
(STM; rprvVAEP 
AS “fe. HTTf 

PaAAKS' pack 


/fe ITif^ FOOT 7A KM' 
Tte- 'A/^IghI 


HPR.WARP Again as 
puttot p.EAa-\E$ Back 

AGAIN" 


172 
























ITS ScMPTH lti& ReTWfeN A WALK aJ A tJ A SfNtAK 



* 7 ^ d F£tT WORK 
UP W VOWH 

MKe p/stons 

—HACTO RE 
0>4Onj^. 

C-AW RE M Q k( CK 

AS 4V - 6 snrps pt^SuC. 

oloh&s, $'s ics 

12k P! '<;, WHAT^^P' 

gut its Hvoee 

£mtABL& FD£ 

FftSf T/M/We - 

HER&'s Ik WPU-'KWOWN 
FT^/VlUtA F^lil/u' TriCRP 
u*S<^p CRFATu |2£ (GW 4 S ) 


"S I'kTT MUCH OF 
A PfisRlTM WfTH 
A SMAT C'R SHORT 
CREATURE WITH 
^riOPT ' &'. ; S - 



B 2 & s' a- M- 2 , / 



s.yTBp«r ; A~Vf i J&ss Po£- cenr/cr fxtRkwe (Tpv\’ pass P&< centner EXtRevte 

TI,«! up "fCu-CWNM TpWp Kife PCWN Tt-fe-UP 


-'■f\ rVflH A TApupP- pl(?LP£ 

- - LC ws l£&> W£VE (SOT 
' ... FAMlUAR P^OPu^MCF 
Ti /F<u4 ACTCW \HTCO 

■tar a iPACeef ttMb. 

-c-erer tfwp i&'Fj.tqfW 

tVN WfFH-rt^TOP L-ECr 

■'..sri a^we upe irt 

->^N6tN& Th£@p- " 

< 2 £jpr APwJNDTWfc 
': ^fKEA Sir EC'NOtP 
=c &. iJie Aero/ - 

■ ...,s weCan twistIk. p&fv(S 
*. = m caw yapv -f?c evag msmcNS 



WE CAW 
CHARGE T/te 
TIPPCUFJTFS 

euswiw gw 

AW- PHASES 
OF EACH 

Step - 

POWER iW 
KNEE ETC- 




NBfT 

srFP 

• Ccx>irrpi 

sra> 


173 
































M zee's ohb that wcm& - 



* 5 sheps 1 pee sec 



UP IH THE. AIR 
R>P Jl£$f cm PPAVHU6 





f&st 

fb£e 

POWW 


PKT&m 


¥c{Jr 

p5p> 

pom 



Heepk A/s&ftfsfl VZRSion THAf VtiffiS- ( 6M 


* 4 firsts && ) 


Mife UP it* ThtAlR 

r&p.7\N6 pfSAW//VG^ 




Bfi&KtoQ tz 

mm 






£A0 


■7- 

J 


&fRmz 

I JOW 




gg 1 ^ 


|4&& 


* O 


‘■thriliW <|iT: 3X T ■ 


7 exn^eAlG' 

U*V 


jEKrep&Se **Yr*pr 


f-t^KtiT LbR 


174 




































































CM G&T SQ/W£ COUNTERACTION GOING ON A fAZT SNEAK (jWS ® 0XA60m\T£D ) 


CONTACT 




CONTACT 



Kzepih S A 
Sui&tmY 
D/FAHEgf^r 
PFO^iue 
FZOtA (A) 







t)OWN 




fS&jT 
p^Am> 


AtS-CA 
&JGUT& 
PiFPW&tr 
-P&OF/t£ 
RSQft C 


BACK To (X) 


PASS flOS. 


-fv ap 


contact 


Samcrm 



<3 P C 2> @ F j* & e^Krc{J) 

( iAWWV, TN!£ ISTbe iWA - HMCtf GW APR.y //V A £ppiiO© WAY 7C A igS? CAHToNY ACftON fee) h&uRp.) 


> 

■J- 


175 































































RUNS AND JUMPS AND SKJPS 


I ft A WALK ALWAYS CM FOOT IS ON Ik GROUND. ONLY OMF FOOT LMYlS IkGRDUttb 

At A t tAIF. 

!H A PUN Bom FFBT APB OFF Ik OOt(NP AT SOME POINT rCk 1/1 on 3 POSITIONS. 


Hi 


ThK£ A 
ifAiK OH & % 

IF C«r FcoT 
ft m im 

ikmuNp 

iAi tlH t |7M£ 

m oottr wave 

A /?ftN — 
HAVE A 

yepi fast Wm • 

£f $t*ps p^itc) 



eur 

~‘Wsr ~ak& 

£3FF 7H£ 
4PCXJ&P 

mo we 

A 





h 


f 



Al^£#7 fcor 


L WAV£TC'^ 7VAT WY f fftf/ Tt/a/ wmaP P/sr^LI^^ OAAtA^£rS??C A A - 


176 
























//£(?££ %e SAMP 1-V (TH A $)T MOfc V mUP /- M0& iMM' & W/(i<S- 

fiur $w4* just wiTtt nm Orifa e&oom ft n& ^ - 

4 'Normal' pun on 6‘s ^s. p^esse) 



V 


fife p£>s. 
4- 


itw, UP 
5 


c&mr 


WE Q?UW> TAKf T^e SAM£ TMGf PdTflu DoWrt (failloNOtt^S icdTfcUPft&tT A/#Ttf> ircti^4. 



Wm$> A S //Vi (Mft Tf-f/MO W fTH Mc&'&fifsotl ' fpOpDRZONZ - 

A CA$S%z>ft Ptibt OH 6 ( s - 0HT W/ftf-fte CFFTfe^WWP f&P 2- PPWTWK-fMs V(omr^ $m&- 



ARm AT W )£>££' 


177 































AH 07 HZ& KUK OH £>S - 

Hz&k ikt y&RiDH OF 1h. SAMS Ttit A& " 

NOTP Iks ZpPuesP a£M ACncW - WJrW KARP I A ANY UP ^ pCWflf Cfl lUSOPY- 
Hvs> BOTH fT&T AR& OFfHu QPcuHD fcfc 2- fRMRS, 


i 


2 

'ftft 



3 i: 5 6 7 

fas& ro£. ifet h/s-h 



ftiS'rftWS- OpF ‘ Atwxr 

COTfTS££ 



WITH RiAiS m CAN po /dl'Ikt'Ti H/NGS W£ PIP WfrH VW<S, 

Ifct riFAD CAW SO CfP W POWN, SIPS TO SIPP, BACK W 1fie Kcp/ 

CAN B0MP WtWfSr/N OffOSfm TW^TCNS ,-ft* FFFT Fk>P /Af W COfeto, 

g\lT W£ CANT PO AS /MUCH £sCAU€e W£ PONT WAVS' SO MAA/Y FCSfffiOtfS 

TO $>o IT (H BRCMS&Hul £il H IS fftSTIfc cw /J& Mi<sfir£uN ov Os) ! 

■*■■.■ i 

y J 



fctiLE'PF TtfUMS ON A EliN' 


ViHPN WB RAtSetfic BOp/ 



IN TEie UP pOSITTOH - 
RAf$g I r ONf-V 54 HWJ> 
or bven of A Heap 
NB'/lsE A WHOl£ BEAD. 
thAt^ rco muCM. 



178 



















































As vt/rfK WAm, 

CAM CO&f& -pi &. go0 
J^VgEsp (T CW'l&e oppose $f£p 
^ K^p IT SH5Af«fT OMIfepASS.pOSfTTbK- 

6 X 


H^P 5MS-HTP/ ' Mf OM 7lie PA$Mf& ffeSflTON ' 


5g) AS W ffW A WALK" 

wp cam vApy i r ry havins'I^ &£>v 

<2p PoWM CM He, f AT^WpPiAt^ R^/TfON 
BlfTSTf^TKfeATK^ K^THe SAV^ WAV- 




179 



w^cam rmrn*i goDY £/i>rvays 

ON He KXTK^Mea td 6PTA paWNY 

isFApcr- 



























































TAKF A W^t>mONAU APAPf) 



AS wnn a wa.uk- 
Foe VITALITY 

7t*6 N&m tiCKCtt 
fZp&CH WITH A 
^TRAf&tfr LC& 


4—ON Ss 

ANP Push OFF 

w/rn A 

^n?Amr 


OoniA SFOlMs ' 
G£ ON’ S'fi 

W PH /NgFWftSS' 


VVF CAN! f>[M! 
A FU(V FFOVf 

Awy ftyz<T(OH 

Niu-Wti- 

£rm vim 

Tut'OCMTAOL' 
& -ft* mmm; 



ns 


exTpgwfe 

qd&vc r 


^weflw; 





iwpow 

FtBfncNS." 



g%Tizmz 

1(CpptfN 


-ffetf/Sf# ' 
ft>£ 


Tk VOViH 






OVApT FRA\ 

T&e-UP 


PCSiTloWS' - 

-fh^Fm- 

snap© 

IN fUt AIF 
PO$F/OK . 

f'ofc SffjJpsr WITH 'fJuL paSN-ORS] 


1*e t|p 


mss f®s 


exrpme 



















A BAST HUN C on ^ s ) €WCW NOT 00 
;ACTBV lie SAME WOUBTT0 AS ilk GOONf&^l, 

rrzoMfrjCW - make \t Hrntfc on tom £. 


MtP <N A FAST mN iht PC&lTiCNS 

£ttaiu> ovmAP Aimro/ 

No HTTP CAm 'The TYp. 



& A'Af<?ftVW(/ 7i?c AB/H5 (as M A WMb) COUNTER- &iCH 07H#2 , 


wsstwpm' 

aS if wouu> (¥ 



we Ow «av£ <£om Foot SVPTASE 

ona^huh- sar noton a mu<. 

FAIT 


ttu&$ tu CUCHt f Cl-KWiSS &NP-U& a\ 

l W*S-7» STAND £>« y 



PC To VA&y If' Wtt£T ABOUT hiAViN&tUtpSSrS 

E&APfPY oppose 7£> Tie SrfiNQARP Bun? 



ttm® a 4 PPAWfP(T m %L AitfpMAH AAfp Ofitbt MIDftP ftgfffOH 

fb$ 9 t&' POSITION 1 0 L 100 D/& TUfr :pO Ml - /AfeWftrtQr PHStf 1 b tW> 'W fefY M 0 ££ FoprtW 

ft* A PAK- f)mr nor too mat) 

MSS fa -op ^ 



&(St&Hte 

MPW-6 

PP$/TOT' 

A &ip£fctf 


181 
































! (ZAH 4- 
HUGE FOfiMRP LFAH " 

JAi 

Ifce FASmFihz Fm£B RUN S 

T^e A'lO^E ff FORWARD. 

f A tip IT pc&Kr HME To SE^i 
w BAiAHC^AFFTh^Tma y 


0£WUFF{, 

m cam takr Tims men Fumm- - 

RzfFS a FQN. Of4 6 s f pLAHHQO FR&nifau 9FR&D Foot pdS'TfcNs) 



Cause or n?t ion& i$gs it Nm>$ at i-msr £ ads-it/oWs 15 w«s tr work- 

7*0 K^TTie f^RS- MOV/rt/6- ff/ Aw 4£C. '1R£ UsflPS -Hie To£ fetpDWS. 



tfowA&oar th/s i z. s 4- 

A 6 PRAWIN& RttU I — h-J——-I 



Ft<& t^WM 


(3cj>y cwty 


PA>i 

up 


0ooy OHAj 

fKJWW 


/WfjEf^nAfisty, 

r 


U<A> [7-14 
Ro^iM . - f -j- j 


ftWttT 


L&S 4 5 6 7 

PcWfP/ pfeK j~—4—-f——-j 

SriW^r 

USSr 


FT BAB&iTT F&IX 774AT G FPAME&/S p£7yj-y A NtCnZ RON IMAM A 4 0 ,e 5 ' PBiWf/^S FUN 

Am m mm, AToFmtmr cf ' waw / fastaph ^ aw 7 & po 


182 
































































pc they rnp back ^ R>m ? f me vtotmiY? paa/<si£ iccmci? 

PC T^v S WINS F&'M 5}pe TO S/PE? PO THEY HARP.iY MOVE Af Alt ? 


f/V A OHCHR OR 5TANPAEP Pu/V 
TWRAPMS^AS ?n A wai-K) 
APR OPRPS fm TO TT/£ L£6S- 




rsTRY a Rmsmcrep Am action. 
i u Aim sr/4- opposes Tfc 
&ur mcyr/vw is ££$v£&m>- 



A&WS AT RRBOW " YRRY P/-S?i£(crj£>. 


PaStPM) IN a WOWM? RUN ' 




Cfo A vw FASr PUN 
TUTORS a pAM&Cfl CP to MUCH 
AfiM MofeMmT- 

IT CAN Bp TOO FA ST drtf CONR/S/N&. 

Tm tps act/cn Should aka t& 



183 








AHP Fc&C .£ He |%j2Sfj£7fVg 




r> 

T^-l 


pOTH F&£l 

AHGUW T&WA&& 
as. 




to Both me 

£NU&> A WAV' 
ffaOM «£ - 


S AW AH&Pi R(AfC OH 3k ( 3 /ye^ps TfoTW To A^iPP/VTS Ife u)tM> A&A wJ U&ACTZ 





184 










































ABOUT VAWlN* OTWfr PASSES' /5 TW? /^(V P^Ot^SgpS ? 

fyfjzy oth bb. Passes- fcsrrxf/ <30 ftw/v — tko^h goip fppt art oft The. spoumj). 





%<i mxitir orAR m 

ft\QWfihTf\T W|U- WAVS 

T5> Se ppsrRicr^ 

</«c^ It*? PUMPfwS' 
EA/£RV 4 FRA.MJ& 

(6 T7ft^ A hpCCtlR) 

WF COUPDAMJteA 
RZitV PN i^S-AMO PUT 
T?fe ApMACIitN f)ft £& 
(Ar PUMfX A &Q3&1 
Wot‘)W> 8F V^2/ ^ 

ep'rFCTTVE. 


185 
















c 


'xm&ti' ^ CouLfy A iZUN ANP HAVF iUe fim$ &>m Twice AC €PO|V AS Ik FffST. 




wg d^utP 
/*AK£ Hie 
£«&<2Afgi' 

ANP HAVfc 

Ik AfiMS 

sWff/6 iftftS 
16'S' 

At^> 

Ji* 


Ik BoPy 

pACKWACPS 
- 

Crr @A*A\K£ A m' 


AfSJW PA*P» 





f&i ApMPrwiN' 
1W ipsi>cj(*i7 


Af*ft ?.*& 70S. 

%C 33 




W£CW 
S-WIN6 
iU ARMS 
IN A 

$6 Ape 
eeGUiSg 
wg Havf 
ife r«Mg 
ic PC 
ir iw- 

Wiftf ImirTfc - 

_FAVa£ 

TkfPacNT 

AK»I Fqi 

B/W&& 


Hfi(2gC A S PRAWA/Cr 

>HcwfN^ h cw iws caw yAfy fi& Siummws, ok a fast £tw " 

aswn; im 7Ae- pyg pofswV r^ap it as Just i u swm aw leg W ome 


*■■ 


ARM 6CM6 ARCaAD, 




PA6 Rs 
UP 


gXffigWg 



SpM> lCY/&( 


wsr 


rsiisr 

ftor 


6^cjf 



G-iW^-T 


AtAO ife gACPS Go f&CM CCAjCAVg t& CONVEX, "fte B^fTH'fST Wtk-AFVHff CpSS M£ ^/fg 


186 

























$s£Z£S A jOGGiNG ON G 5 


■k 

BpeAm tmi$ run is suskhV &qw WNH& ?r$%em& wim^cm ON 5$ 

Am grouse ih<l i&tGiH cf %& sr Rif^sr is MROH FUhs&p-C tewtm'm iNfkMR 

FCt JwSr 0N£ FfAm) -Tki. GCWlsRvE ^IjpuefiWS CAM @g A/CFF ALtKz A&rPfm- MWmr) 


SXJll^YfjS 
Tit* frotiiT 


$C¥*hi 


im up 


PA& ptfi 


F^r 


AIK 


I* 


T vV 


p*SS pOS 


f.H f :. -.-"M . + Km. l-:-U J^rrw 




boreme 


.-.■.•■■ ■ a-: m wmww Mi k+i-k h-:-hh 1 --F+:-fl ■ ■ ■■■+■ 


POWN 




f 

V 

FXlWft 

•j ^y nuk-.VJuL k.:-. :• A ■ 1 Hn 

TUlPOWW 


cotf&c, 


•*<!. 


Uz fmr 'fw&Fvubikt &*%s a&wnp w a ‘Zmau- opci^ m Mkad jnsreces uPx-np powW 


,A YctifAg <£if>i- m*6ht ai^ oai g(s - fs^HiqeP Arnett - j/viTH OA/tV CN£ PfiAW/is© CFFItm G ficuNp. 


187 



















































- L 


JAKfc A FAT /yw* it-wvwryLr 

TH££3S G0tH6 To m U>1 5 Of UP a*J POvjV £W Ite Wl&Ht S,FCMSjF H0 So HeAV y 'hkstWNRTiWH 

iM/^PiAW mirowsibe ur pcsnto^o then he fa^to lift h>ngujt up cwrstitHmT mms 

IN c&T TO FAU- DOWN him/IPf AGAIN, 7HFN HIT U&D LFANS FoPwARPTO HOPIhe. PtiSHTP, 



&&AP 
to ft^> 


14& MAfiWfdFf-jUk 


c^KWf 


cc^ti?4c’i 



C;^WT>k':-r 


AH MPt'MTAMT THING- - WcN 4 £W/£R A JHT UAH ToWARPS '%* C&TTE - 

m we ttiEKnw e*r t^nTUf&A ■— 



188 







































SOM&OMB S^lP THAT ThBCHAS&'tZ AM //V VFNTi OAf THAT(S ORGANC16 AOWBS. 



Cf&rHHlH THOU SMPS Of AfiOMp 'CFASF CAfilcens 

ffeoPtfC0G ^VP/^S 2vJ IMV&trN£ I /NZ(AWoNS ON#£f Wife. 


CAMg&GN 4 S 

r 

/ w Si \ 

I cP 6fe 

o/V Tt , 

V on £ r 


ftfp FAST PuAfS AfiE /tofts BUfTASlF FOF-ONCPT 
IVtfKtf MFFO FFWFF fmfTKM TO 

FUnonai in L&svm beCm®f itmuowws^ 


ANO t'c- UtHGFR-WFGFO FtmFF $@&Q 4 ( 0 y 
MoFF liM£lo BfMPnoN ~£NE CP-tWMc&E 
PCzmON S To HI I P CAFPY7H0 bff. 


■vn-i. 




7ff£ 4 DRAWING FORMULA HUN 



FFF0CVYF FOR. SUOjeT- L E3GSP F\GU&&£ 


TfHF IS So FMT ( 6 Srepv seco/Jp) THATlH&l&S WOT FNOU&P hm lb £W0 5 

-tfie A&HS AfcDWP VIOUFNTpf -SO THEY FOUND ITS E&7" TO Stf&ICH HtcAPMS CUT 

IN FRCNT^ FMt U0B ACIOM WO&S lIHPFZ 4p mfWlk&W f OH To HAVg OJ/WSF 

v- ON ~{ht FWF 

VERY P (TTi-^ UP aft) PCWA/ OP #S4f> W ftpy 



Pfc>KN 


fWcff 


cmrscf 


POWH 

■vr--~ ~ ' -■ ! t -— ■ ■ ■ I -HW IMIWV 


£X7ftgM£ 


fc-\7Fts?Me 


PA££ ft>£ 



iMPcftfA^r 
FoOprA 
sreAi^r #& 
C^vtacT 
|N PFft= 


ppwm 


AAp A€Al/Y, Wg £'AOUf-P VARY 
i&e. Su{ GtfTt-Y To 

ffl5W> pta £VF PFAP POJK PEGS 

PfcWf 


£KT7?PM£ 


fflifl -£fF 


PASS pDS CCNT/kCr -EXTft^E 


189 

























































Ff-XRmF 


l& PCWH 


fi\z Bop'y Gcec f&dm cony ex to concAyz Ba&poz 


£&NTfi£ 


VAfcl/fflOH€ OH 4 tMwm RVHS 


Tf {!£0H£ IS. PBANNFP FRCM The. UP IN Alp PoZiTiCNi PMT ITS 

<x\vf on m sam ^ 8AS.IC fhTrmi ao% e fbmaiA. 


i-iF’Rpk- A V0ZT W/Lt> QN£ - WlflfA&M £WfN6£ -■ ptANtlfi? FfZGfc'tU*. PUSH OFF POStflOHS sen STil-B- 

CTAFP CH TbzFtfMM PAfftptf 



paStf Cff xDtirrx' ft&i Off 



f«£^ OFF 



PCWN 


CONTACT 



pUFH OFF 


H A5(7) 


190 












































\ 



MADb THIS RiM CM 4-k - ITS PLANNED FROM Tie PUSH OFFS U ) tod 


I 

IT wave DC*W wifrfA StT fyyyr uPani VDMH "vJ STCFfCH Oti TUt SOP/ &ui Tti<rP£& ACjicN O1.RP1&' l‘i- 

;r -: A •.' fU£ - Ptpmw Wfffl HAH?-, ARIA iYlffl KHF, CCATmi^ ?*j ANIMATtP P?PSPtL'Tt v£ Fi-COR. APf)ED ArT£&VA/2iX' 




tx.'RM'.- 


c-ctirr 


191 














































IN O P i£NTAt4~Y, A SCOT C YCim •- 

LOtfG cVCi-ES AF& GfZEAT. GHazr cycles okViOi&v Y ^f) W — 

&fT/F H/F fAKB S&TPAk ^TEiPpS-' frflW /A£/AT7CWS /A/ ^e- £Cfi£#WFS W 

PAS&itiS' P0£l7i0tf£, etz.-'THEN HCok BACK To ^j’}, /r OtoH' o&PplAY% 
fVe OYA RpAX>iH& ir AS A C-JOHB ^ 




2 


PgAWA/e /?JnP) 


■ B 9rm FpkopcoHp! mo\nr spcmlch faster wan mm sfcau s 


j—.- 


f 



7& Make a mmu o& a s poke appear to bo apouno ih a circ-tt 

HP AIBFP A MtHIMUAA Of A PpAWtN&O / POSiTiONS. 


TWO WONT Po T 
Tju<p'fucm& - ao 






i r GO AkCiHP-, 







&MK To 


192 























VACATIONS at THIS 


&AS(CAU,y JUST GETTING Jtf£ 
3 OfZAWHeS 1C 60 AROma. 


zxjKmz 

lip 


fro pcs . 


zKnspMg 

UP 


SS PcS 







Am 




ue ' l - 



okotmcf 


or course tr short figu&s 



Of (TO STiOWoRK WITH A TAHffr flSUfif^ 



/ 3 4 iL & / 


193 





































































tfj&S TkQ- StA/VPA£P 'VZfZQCN W& &PGAD Leo- AGZWbi OH A 3 PJUwiNG flutf " 



CcHITpCf CVfVi7\&r 


AMP FgP ik, LA&&PP Fl&JDE- 



owper camber • <«rt*cr- 


A VAPJATfOH tfur snw-cwl&e tWa ftrww — 

ws m ■- RW ft& ** (p 



And wffiz 

To ‘Drop its 

SP&\KlNO If UP? 

hAvz 4 PRAWm 

fCT ONE STEP - 



Sfsfisy,9 


PM ft>S 


l^x Step 


<X-Uf/kT 



AND iiAVB 

3 PpAwms 

fap%€ CTfjfP-- 


"2M stt^p (aT$) 


Jp- ^.oSp^^'L 




THqzz Rmav tsftr A pa<s ftysmcw h$rg « 
i its j'm /^/e©, 

fAV»«W e.4^H £ > 


194 

























































Amp we can stop c 7 q prm fasten - 

W£ CAN Use 3 POSITIONS FOP Tk& FiPST PtfZpF mk ON NY 'TWO fop %C NEXT. 

Hssei ouc first 3 wsirms - izp contact m&mes wmtiwo fc&mcH s^z ^fs 





contact oatr^r 


P.FM TA/xP P AAt> OMPf MAKj? CWe IfilSSTftf&N 0FTWF0N If W FPTTPpPP r S (‘jiAtinAissT } 



Cctfj^cT 



Ht&Btm UP 


&y.TFEm& 


i &ACA 7c> fT) 



CcwffttT 


TfJfS &mu£ 

ViFTtlAUV 

i o steps 

ifi A S^CCA'p 

0^ef*k^y) 


~AU)ftfU,y P4ST- 



emwer 

A HP WF CAM 


PX'TOVte 

,*&«(=£ 


<A ft) Cbfttwcr 

S^/TCM- ficm CWF giDf? Tt> 17, e OTHeR 1&e aPcXZfSR cfi. POHGfTA STpp - 


st> W£ G^T: 


£XT^£?Uf 




$ SW&T 
OP „ 



«. z p£4W/M£ Cun) 


C&tDetY , irk 


-Kvl tmcr mm mN~ [ Ar A ^S 'SS^SmS )*mm !**& 

ii* it: i 4os PractoF RW av%l y ?a$&%>■%& UMffs - lNWfVH>/ PPYP& 

<^s,Vf JY - (SCVA&S r/% id FASTER. fbfL M SPUT TbCcHD &A&S , wtl TvM 

want® -m mwmmz that msm> ■ 



P&S. ?*S 




tttpmiE pc£ 


£xr$mie 


PACC &p<r 




195 






















































WITH A T NO ppAfit)NG PUN - 

"ifff WITHT& \TG ACTION i^THAnrk GOfAlG-HO Ft~t CXFP 

AMP LCOK NKF WHAT IT IS - jfyST pfcA*iifc$l SHoWNO MOP£ OH- \T$$ AT OiTF - 




sQiiA.TT — 



*\ 


* 




A PCUEL0 
1tu.$cRmi 


Hut Ttt0i St/M- vvaNTTP To 6&fiu& HUM AN hi mfORPtFiF SHttp - 


£>/V£? SOhUrtON IS HOTToPUrAUe. PATINO PcFTlOH OFifot&S ftiiUe, MU>£>L& 


Out to favour -two of 7 % fosrncus 



tft 


$0 TMATihe-h y/5 KgAP'7AAt Two PBAWiifeS %JTt Mm T jufFOTU FIGGAR * 


/ .£. " 



A a/p iko w t (sffr' snarinct Fmr apt atso fruit/ closf toGfthnt . 


vW epa/^e.! 

ANP (K Tot. STAR THING WITH A BACK OR FRONT Vl&N - 


/ 




c Lo^ 







Cmr 4cf 


196 

























> 4 Mb IPbA. WO&G PfcETfY hi IC£LY OH A 






UfopiUt, ACTUAL VASSIN6 VCStflCH (s OMtrf&P ~/MWD'~gy Tkc 2 Cti££ 
'JoOm&fl PfmtiHGQ 4r e/CH END -AHifftz P/ts JuMPS %t <PAP Ph& 


'PO&TIQH WOULD NosMMEY SB - 


197 








































ANGTHFF- WAY To PO Tk e 2- TTA'/YlNGr FUN /£ 7& YATfitFi& "fe, fii-HCUFl ITS ^ 

AS' iAA'<Sp At£yAi<S Pip RpOT /f AS A TORT OFOoNwMoNG S'£/yw3t& " 





ANOTNFT fiCnO IF TO FLAIL TIk A&Mt ApDliHD 

TFAMT! <24 UY•" PjTGSfiFTS IN& fini $CT>Y Old 14&A0 

LFf\N TOTWATP AS S/Vj? 6 fCK •-" PA- BT'KwARiT •" 
77? pjvLP-T ~feL 3^ 'TAFjT 'file CMTST C2FP 
"fe, 2- P&AWIN& V=U Ct<£f2!N&' FccST ACTION, 




f 


'?4l miA 7 MOV£ 
/n a rictfrCipcua - 
uiQNG A MINIMUM C T 
fi V&WTMGS 'To IY> IT, 
-ft HTTP AT CtFCjM ACTION 

Couip apao ppc&F&ss 

Top WAFT? -oFLtteK - 


198 











































i 


tHCipmjAW, a stfG&zsnoH cf a pati&ph fo&a&ms HAifiKo vu$$&- 

A RttH- (jf a ontwo9 - rm arms (nouu> flat t~ viap as flow as Tits ayv) 



Fvra final Ammon oka % mmiH& mi -~ftt fossibuz Rum - 
kV£ CAM Q£T /.A 7 t> Blurs^ 






W& CAM H-AVB Just TWO PRA10/N6S - (on cnf€) 

£ctr ITS Qunv FRfFgSFNR 70 FilMWf&F OH 2 W pl<SQPf£S 
£0 TH& fOAW/H&S ART oMjWCS - izUR 2 TRAMPS RAC-U 

But Bcermmo g y tpmsolvfr - (w ^ r p 

■iHe. Ff 

our 

•si# pli<ZOFf£ 
ifk 2*e o&mm 
psf 

'Fite RG-W-F /$ 77-fAr 
AV^y FRMm- 

R> A Ho/go Tba6i0 

/MA&& . 

f£AM£ i, i£ittFoca£ 

2- iS To/fC>/o 
F ilms s fc Wftcijs 
AAMiA A fS 5o/$0% 
TPARA 5 /£ y/u ffecws 


6^.^. 


W£ CAM, OFCCKtfSE, A OP MORf SPUR FC&MCNT. 

I 'YF 'FOUNP THAT 2- FRAMF PiS&OPVF S CAW BF 

usap /a/ Aww sp^ts of acton to Rqftth Turns 


&N& A SjLKy 
6Off0UlF\& FfWCT 



Fs/Tcmy WHeNike action io Ci-oso-Toomm- itacttas a Kind ofvar/Jibf 


199 
































EtijV\MfN& UP QN f IUHK: 



£ECfP f 


I 


i 



. "5 


-“■■ 


4 

_/J_ 


£ 


/ 



X> / i 

Ky 


; APE ALWAYS. CW 


WF Can po EVERYTHING Wp PC ON WMKZ 

EXCEPT KeDUOEP - ROUSblp/ Of HATE 


f ^ "T? 

I > ( 



J£ 


7 


P (JAVA NO UP Aid from I 
GR /3CCRf{U<S- 01PF 72? 

OR NPVOPJIH& T A S/HAlT CiKCiT? 

ApE Xk e Rj5&S PVkAPlMO tiP HaJ POLL Ai f 

OR PUSHING' CUT BpOAPLY? 

APE To Be CoNPiNTO ? 

stiff Tom Tht.POP / 7 

CR. TTfR/ THRASHING ABOUND fti DPOAP ACTION 

WHAT IS lloL BEU LINT DOING? 

BtjOtilP NT SPfiMP MoR&TH*F /NlheAlR? 
ok PO NT SpFNO IV)OpE TAT ON %t G&DUM'P? 


We SHOULD Bp INYfflYfiVE, DARm, TAKE CtiH f CEY 

> / 


/ 


9 T’HlH OF CaueXF - WHO IS 



3 7 


;> 


FAT ? 

0J4> ? 

TMI 

yam 7 

ATHLETE ? 

UNCOORDINATED? 

SPiHSTFR? 

Q LAM GLUT Q LFLTI ? 


GtAfYOS i EiP ? 

cmpuz 7 

bishop 7 

Fin an a fit, 0 
thief? 

CH lU> ? 
DRUNK 9 

A rnt~>'\l 






I Uo CpuFFH ct LN Cl An P - 


? 


\0 AH? OF G QUEST 


K A -±"~ 

P. 


T APT- THEY FUNNING FROM - 


OR TO f AND TO WHAT PU FPCTF ,,, 

WILL HAVE A pRAMATtC EFFECT OH THE RUN 




sjSE^= 


=a=± 


iinia 




KSSSe B.” '.".V ■ ji 



200 


















































$SF3=£ AN SKIP Zj J-EAPj CW -ffie- HB-XT 6 &&£$ Qll m cites) 

'Tf'/AS' OLD WV LOONS A g/T um AN ANIMATE ROM> MAP, guTH&l ACTION S rt£ pmTOi 1U SJ&IC& 

&ve&nHD& wgVe been talking about. 

FIRST m BUILD HER STARTING RUN - Otf 42 - ££&IWAWG WITH Ik*. CoNrACn S 

■ « 







5* J cww&r 


(^) LofiTNZT 


«ar * itAll Pom - 



.ARM SKTE#*!? 



gfie starts owr W/rtf A veRY Contained old Persons Run - LIKE A/V ek-AtULLTE. 


mP- nm> <GOE% UP ^ PO0i sW AROUND IN A -TIGHT CIRCLE 
AND HEP HAND ACZiqN-$ xr&eM£ 5^-f 0«J8' PuNCNRL FORWARJo- 



Cnp of woefe) 

— LJ«P A gOffl 


3S! 


HAVING WORKED OUT %& BOOT, HEAD, 1M 3 sw) ARM ACTION, WE ADD 1ke.BCB8B& PIGTAIL 
aj ca/W ACfow W flapping ancient gptms lAt&p-as. usual, poing oil thing at a ttml. 


201 

































































<S/f£ Goes up tOWN MORB AS SHE TAKER SIGGEfL STEPS - 




202 






Am sue goes Lowm as stm f&pamz to jump-,. 




!^35's 

WO A ,'£ GU$£ - 



203 
































207 













7&|£ OtP WPY AW WON A SIT FIFE A 
WW<ltiG ANATOMY f^SSCW- gtfT 
mu-YA m<x/mi$F/i%B8rrfcAT fcmuiA - 

A STMP420 ^OS HOUYWCOO PEAT. 
SHAPE f tUrrwrrH KN&S duS &N80WS- 
with floppy ibu&m. ima& 

a corner tfcw&N Sorrow fm> bks. 




H 0 &S iUc Pattern of nm &irush Skip- 
Puns in a«J Hops fpqm hfR ffft foot ant imps on ike leftFoot. 

2- W1K LATTE- H&t B.I6-HT FvOT LANFl ANP SIP tbP S FROM it W IMPS 
on -ptc SAME Fi&HT FOOT'' ~tHpN IMpiE P/ATS-V PUTS POWN ikt LPFr FOOT 

ps Hok moA t it, uwbiNs on TUa s AAm toft Ftar, Ike* SAME wrrtfiteRf&tfpo 

(Hm Bop y «ltps rfvlvoin& 



K 


■At 


w 


3 : / 


2-r 




, - f . - •■ 

' • fZOT 


Xc >:.wr * 


CSftfffCi x CCttPCT 


> I 



/ff <$ 


4^* Ha* Cn j^pf for-r 


X CertPCr X OiHJlxr 




<? 


X OSHTtyST 


f Hope of/ >^fr Fear f— 


PU*i& iN 



0 



Tc as <sar 


/wnciwuotf 
RJ£ the- failp 


X CCHtfiT 


fc 


» » 


^ w i^r ftor - 


NcppifcS '-• 
K&rtFRx>T 

^r'„,„... 


208 





a skip mo Pounces on ono foot 

THPPT AP& AT KIN PS Of SKIPS BUT Tt EA^/C ONE IS 

$rrP - h o p] Sr bp-Hop, &W-HOP, StwP-HO^ efc. 


WHEN Go fORWARp OL\R fCCT OCfP& A BtT 



We 'step and hop oh one toot- 

then we change KEPT HOP ON TUt cthht foot 

USUALLY, VVF TAKE TWICE AS LON&ON ifc STEP 
AS WE PO OH The SKIP- 


OR WE HOP BPPAPPy LIKE Tit QLP LAOfk SKIP ( POPPING ON 16% - ON CN&) 



Xw 00 PCwN Afti> 'YOU HOP o vHZ - Then you Go T>cwN Ahd You Hop ovep etc , 

ON ON£ FQ&f SdMfc FOOT CW iht P&dT i-Afto/WS* On THAT FC&T 


MANY THINGS CAN HAPPEN WlTilN 7?e Aero# MOMftA BYT Of ARMS, pGAS> r WC- 
To MAKE IT iHTERBTTiNG - 

THaPP Apt SO many WktATlOKS ~ VARIOUS TYPES - So MANY FbSSiBH-trips - 
A LITTLE Girt shipping- Popp USES A DouBiT BOUNCE■ Him Quite PapiNim ACCENTS. 

A prizefighter. skipping pope harpw ^swecT&e g&ouhd-■■ hardly any movements• 

TiH&ES A POUBlp BOUNCE CN FACH mrS-WEpf SUGfp vfPYSUCf. 


209 
















{ Lgik SAY WE DO A 



WE WAtftHtFiGtiRE Tc -STFPsW HOP, 

C HAN GE EWT t RTNP 2>yd HOP, 

CHAN& PPPXj Crg-p ihJ HOP etc, 
HAVING A07W> ft oar CvMtcH /WjCfSF DcN& - 
HCpHlMQ- A&auNP Tue-gPCM To PO TiiS ) 
WHAT PO WE 00 F/RSrr 
Answ. Tine CONTACT*- 
WHICH QHf&? 7H0&U- BP S&l&RAl.,*, 
Aftsmr: The ImFOHjaHT ONE S - 
fi& NliH A MOAim. WAUC, MAKE The 
TWO MAIN Contact POSITIONS . 


OK, WHATS The TmFC>? 

- i NETP, !C' AVCoMGPAJk'T&SH.iPS 
U&T PO it ON f> PDR0KH\ 

' l PiiU- S7iClO& J 


OK, NON WHAT? 

Afipcer. Vi HU ., w#6d r ?A fiMm ., 

Her? FHT tNTUe- NEXT Z STEP CcNmCrS. 
lES MM0 THEM S FRAMES AfARJ - 

i wrsaves* uz 3 oarers p&zsgjoNp 
ajHiCH Asarr wwrfr was tweft 

( UOpP&AHavriplfci BOO*) 

U^-3 imve owr T&* A£M ^OWR^-A/OVV. 


frn, NOW Air W£ HAW TbpaE Pur iN 
The fkvsm FOS-iTtom ftSTWFfN &\CH 
CCH TACTf., 

M(f WAlT A MINUTE, UA!S BE QxTVEP ~ 
lets BREAK The ACiioM UP A BIT* 
ter 1 ? MAKE Tbt ARM EWING Ar US „ 

w tom- oh -fee 2-® CeNflCrpas rrew•? *$33 

AMO THAT WU- MAKE CCNTACJC^I 7 
Hit PASSING Fb£/nctf§ FOBTUeAfom. 


OK NOW Km Pot //V tii e Po smeufe . 

TH0 WQOtf> NATURAi.iT <SfO POWN A B(f 

BetW-^ 4 PAcH Contact- 

fim THAT GIVES US 3 tOWNS fWlTTCOHO 
ONiNOTS A ~TP\PUE BOUNCE PUpm 

EACH CNE&AIL- STR IPE - HtCE~ 

HOW ATT WE HAVe To Vo /£ MAKE 

im&uJGmr Cushioning 

Tt<cAm swings at each &yd- 
T**tS WqRVT, WEll- on tuds C sutwe 

Oc*JlP POLtek ITPVRIH^I gf AbixNG CN&>) 



W& AlAK^'fte 

First £tff 
cvwt/icr 



,.—JWvVAi .U|4/ „ WT „„ 




17 



peor fAKfes 

ypsT? ’ 


gaohT Pborn ^ 

r % cr£p^\ 


ccflmcr 


Wf5e$r 


Pcs * ra 


POWN 


210 




























































A^l 



\\ 



mow 

ft£ 

OXilYTEK 

INTACT 



AMP 

SAC£ TO 


CONTACT 




g£0< takes 
" FluX <tsp~~~ 


cornea 


ONTACi 


c owsusr 


COWWCf 


WJP^St 


PAS>itf£j 

fWstfiOU 


con'rAf-T 


wew M-wm* 

Tnt,Hm> Amt& 
ON itn, fIR&r THIR 
OF "flee, WALK 


THINGS. UP 
A Atm£. 


C0W7HC? 


211 





















































































I V^ C&ttLp AiOT&RL (he, j //vi /a/G OH A S KIP / /, SfOp K(NP OF OjAt? A RHYTHMIC pAHCfi 
Ip WB HAp TV/S - ' - A WM[<1N<? DANQZ 


8 mm 8 f/ms 
Hop HOP . 


o 

o 


Change fact g 

^ HOP 


8 

HOP .. 


8 

y HOP 


8 

HOP 


Cbistje, fa&T 


Chelae ’fccH 


F'-F TO CHANGE ~(%t RHYTHM SLIGHTLY, IT COULD SB 


8 

Hop 


8 

HOP 


\ 


iOFam 8 

HOP HOP 


Ch 3 *ge fcot g 

-'.~X 




HOP Hop 


V 


iom 5 

Hop Hop 


r /I 

C/unai? ‘tod 


Ob 3na c. Psl 



IN A EPOAP JUMP Pit PERSON STARTS' WITH A RUN and VVWP£ RltHNtH0. 
WORftB IMTO AH ANTClRATfON- pMICm ftp ffAVB fkc SptHL KEEP Fs VPTOHBA 



etees up 
75 6£> P<W 


Gm s pcwjy 
io GO Up 



$CfZU(i!ty&; .TOW TOMES' 

OJV UWD/V6 HP 


5/W£ 5qer CF THiMG IN A HaBUM.lLt to MAT NO PROGB&S. - 

•/5m7 JUST LONGPNOUGH TO CLEAR- Th£ HUjBPLfi ' OtttTB SiNULAP- 

7c A /HfifiBF W A PFpSp SM3W - 



4<v'OP4> - !. i-V; 


fitSHt/yz ytc ps/kq PbFY;4£C> 
rt>4 cgrcv&L 


Hf l up RPAPH ‘hJ S TRf=lCH LAMP 2&d To IHIO A PUti A&AlTi ■ 

ViTRp i& ANTICIPATION BM'tr POTS Hr iatt VpFy TSA&- 


212 

























Get LOTS OF LOAN INTO gpp/BS, 

7if/ffiK /W 0W> 'GO-WM^ ANIMATION MAXIM' 

' wwetf y&« rmK You've gone far enough - &o twice as fag. 


I 


.._ ,4-. 


WEN 7N0 SAY f IF (m lea FAB-You CAN ALWAYS PUFF IT SACK LATER 
ELL, l NzVFGSAW ANY OAF PUFF IT PACK- 


/ 




FEINS PpLFlGFKFMZ i p SAY, mil You CAN ALWAYS INCPFCF \r EATER. 

Cano / mvm anyone increase it later either) 

ANY WAN, IT HELPS To GET TOTS OF LmN WTO tue ISopm, 


/ 


A CAFfccM ' JUMP EIKETWS WoRES FlNZ, ABN ACTION fS GOOD EE&Y ARE OK 



. ..—■ 


Fur INTO DELAY om CFifie LEGS - 



'iNFlTpC BREAK It UP WITH MORE ACTION WITHIN Tie CfUMR 


(WE&HT) om a JEMP 

To avoid Floating gnf weight - 

!F A PERSON JUMPS IN The AtE 

we've got to get action wimiNTUGmuRAL acton■ 

Get The AicNF GOING 

OB The FEET GOING 
WITHIN The GeNfEAf JUMP* 

7 Vis helps GNe it weight W avoids floating. 



Cctyp&c 




213 















I- £ i S TAKf£ /?■ JTtMIgS 5 TART I NO f ft)M A <5 /A/v D/Afc? R3*S j TiQfa ■ 

SOI W 7AK£ ASPtiT %c SAME TIME * I { Ql Spcmp S 76 FOTkaJtMP 


[ft GO IMG To SB &&£& 
‘To S/iOW 7WS W/7W 

'CmcON GHApACmO 

proportions. ' 

THt&iKJ ump is on twos. 

/gtrop ows^, aw=s\ 

COWU> Be APD&D/T ' 
\ T&'VARNlSH'm J 


MOTHiHQ WRONG WITH ft- 

/ r functions w&t- - 

/ HKFirBECAUSE 

rrt not o vtpan miTo. 

- OiMPUE 2 kQ SOUP 

f 


Bur now lets loosen 

The. WHOLE 7H1NG UP' 

\m Can go quite fats 

gy PLANNING IV ON OAI££ 
Tui AWING IN 

MORE GTR&fCH ' 

MORE CcMpPfFFiCN ■' 
PRIAWEP yftjKfST - 

/\0Vt RFVEfmS" 
OFCONOAOy /\WPN' 
SHIRT, AMY EXTRA SITS, 

QltTWSUPT /$ MUCH 
MORf FLttlP Avb ITTTF 

( 2>ud C^rfoo/Jy ) 

rtt AiM MArn^oFTTSm 
WHAT YOU UK0 2u*) 

How much 6r how utile 

You use these- wvice s 
To a£T ya/O 






'T/o l$f&T \G 

Su T HAppW SEEN 


214 


























17 





a s >i a-o 






20 '2 / -25- 


|«WJl-1-[-j-pj 

| 

| 




••fVi v 1 1° ' 



JX 


3 % Sf 36 3B 46 



/c iW 0a r 

ww 





(Va- *foJ£>S ) 


215 










iJi-JSH 








■F——- 





z 


r hi 

u "f r- 

■ ■■ r» ■ ... ■ . 


—£_ 

L T ___ 


,-ir. 


— —-i 



--•' 


-- ‘ 


L 


rrrr 


■ ■ ■ 




—* 


— 


— 


zoM —-—■, 

1 " ■■; -' 

1. 

3 '*!' ■ " i - 1 * 


-— 




<iHr- 1 ^aik..: 3 -r-" 





- rrr- 

• - - ■ 



- iBk ■■ 

- ■ - 


. 1 ^ 






T-- 



■iEii 

-V- 


nb ■ 




• ---——* • 

■ . r- p r*w 

ut ,, 4-- 


ife,... . 

••——T7tvt—^ 



itts- 




- F 


"1 tr?w", 


§? 


tags 


»-^-p -■ 


! ■j&T’&fr 


* F 


P^ 1 ^ii ■ 11 \n H f . L‘.lu - f ift» nur A 

I 

- - - - * - * - - - I 


I 




'«a"^V"Iv* iJlSB ,-i 



'■V : - 


H ^^ r*~p'_ ht j ij~~~!* "! 7 *’** J r‘ 7 ' 

' " ■ 1 ■’.■ -.• ‘-*' -r-Y Qr+rr - '■ ™ 






n 


■ fc.» M l ■■ I lu^a'4uiB 






™r®i a 


:__ 


•- L -I-*,— --“- !--wf T i '^rt » n~ t ■*. ■ ■ ■‘■■lifn-.FB m m » ■ 

- — --- - 

•’__ _ _ _ r _ ..."" i. ,i I ’ • „ "’ . . j.t. up-* 


r— 




**rW*T 

~ ~ ~ T~ " 


■ ■ “ ~ m .1 I 


-“- gl- ~ VM 




"V V 3 ;: 




■ m - *. 



— 


■nr*? 


MS*±r-„ f- 




.. '. V. - . 


♦ j'illVrf-- -Tj 



m. -*T- iT--i-3 


__ 

‘'V i • r , -; 

■ 

L:,-: •-■■■; , .-^.vt,. •• _-. 




•• ■ -:. ___ - 1 •■; ■ 

—:—. ,,. 


: ■ 




-fc,j I—— 1-aH^— 


... .. 

- - . , r i -,—,i.,—. 


L^J—u. T~ ■.■l.faJTnJ.V- - +■ ttJ -i m ■ T ■ 

-h 1- —■ --- 







• 


r... ■- ■■■■'■:■ 


— -- 


L*iVe. 




_ 


_ 



' 

. t 1 .' TTv*., *i.. l^" ■ • . m 


-— 




i i T ■ r*. .■- 


, _ “~ p '' "' , — ■ . - - - 

r"-. .• i •• 

.,' r: ■—.—f>s - ■ .■ ' . ^ Y : lr -^r l r^ 

" m’ " J " '■» 




— i«l-im ■) ■ ■ JiUr.— — 

ifc.pi . ;• - r > - - . ?" - t* ■. . ~ « 

r—■'jv "t*— -- "t 

—— ■ . ■ . . ‘ 1 - — 1 ^ 


r; -"~r 


i—“in: 


““r 


- v ■ ■■ ""‘ T 

-7^- 






—-1 ■■f* 8 i ““ h 'Z 

::~“r 


i 




:', 





-TT" 


• —. . - ,; ' V ■ 


H ' 


-- ■- 


■rf- ii “ 'i i i ■' 


-—--- —— -= —■ ■■ 

S .--S- - • ; 5 


• ■ ————— ---------- ^ 

- 



' -^ 

■■■—— 1 ----- -■■.-■ “ 

^ 7 

— - 

“Trr 

• ■ • ■ - f -—;.— 

- > 

- - — -v- - - :■ - ..■: ->• ■ ■ =■-->. ■ . 


. :-r -—42: 


—■-r-rY^rTY.. 



—I j.- i r£" a 

V - 


■ ^ p-~ 4 ■■ jf 


:r; 








Z‘ V 1 .-•-•••. - •• 

,-V. •' V.’ ' 





.■T 

r. 


>®e: 


rw- -- *-- 4 - j. 



,^■1 



cgwiw wmiiMWMWW 

IBUBBmB*13EF41MMMM 




i 


itgaapog^'i maiMiiiiiif' 'naa 
—iMiiaiiB 


.- ‘Z'J, T B ' r — Jl ’■ 


^.. - - _ '■ : —-■—^-—■ 

—.-I—^ii— : —“ p- 1 —-“ • -- • . • •“ —'— I-*-*-— .» -—•.-.t'j- p~ T ■(-■«» . »* p-. -V 

-.-. 1 __ —-. ... - 




4iiLil*mfH»S r r7" Li J 1, 


..„z—IZ 




: W— t J7*ar : :n 

~HBb ^ -'-r' ■■ BBMBBr 



--—-—r’r , !•T^' ^, :’ ,^ • i:r - i, -• • ' • • T~.. 

--- ■ - . tr—-- 


aijb—■ * _ . 


* — . 

, -. -_.. 


-I 'I/j 17 ' ” “■■frr V T J 


■ ■■'W; ft-— 

U-— 


—- 

. ; _ ; ; 


- iB , , ^i} t '' 1 1 .~~ i ', * 7 -ir~ "■" 
■" - ■ ’.T - T 

-!-U ■■ -T- — —. 

• . ■ ■ I ; C ~7 


'■* - „* ■ L T - ,- l ." i 
■ fc... -. - a u fa ^r- ■' 




fc-U 


M fcL ,,. , ^ , ' . , ^ . 




,—,- T - 




V-££#3, S 





_ «_ji- ML* Q ^ ijii *■. i 

P ^TB^J » j-» -*3- 


,-*j. - 




—"T-^-^ ~~ r ^ ^ 

:.i:,: 



-- - 


r*_F- t»— ■ — 

gJ8i£. 



T— 


j:. -r .i ■H^-war—wri-r———; 

|. - — ■' . “l" ■ ■. |l |£ ■ ' ,-^T—— ■ --T 

; jg—■-- 

r.-f.*r *-!- ■ 



■—— 












:-ss 

‘"-fe 





■Jy*.'- J ji v 

€ ■’P’ r'p **■•■]• 

'i ..A id.' * 'u. i* 



1827 £3dwsdfd Mtiybndg&. HUMAN AHHAN/M-AL lOCOMCHOH 
~tk$ /K y YgBiOSE BCCKS A& A TREASURE TROVE OF ACTION IHFC&WTHON. THZR& Np/TR. 

-Hr/r-tm u\\f mm £m.p£ or -swce. Shcoti^g tit action m fp&itcf BfCK&gam gmss 

SHOW'S tiS juSr inhere ~n^ UPS Hh t DotvA/^ a.qe av t^e lnff^RSVt ftw§cFiy-Bci>y. 


216 

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































FLEXIBILITY 


AS / S&iT f 7 heSeaizE 2 Sl$ AHtMATtOH FLAWS- 


WE EiTHeZ HAVElheAlONG KCtfG'EFFECT 
WHERE &ERYWG MOVeS. ABOUND 
Ikt CAME AMOUNT 



ZW&ZYTrttNG fS FLASH m APocm 
A.Li- OVER- fi’i PeAOe 



WF WANT TO HAVE a StA BLE IMAGE 
W S TILL HAVE FLEXIBiUiy 



THIS, i$ how m-GenT: 


"Tie Following devices apt guaranteed to L-imsfR up i l-coSfn up w 
qivf Snap' v itautV to oup Pfpfoema/gb while Ke&pm %t figopf 

Stable soup. 


217 



WE'Ve ALREADY INTRO PUCEb SOME OF jm£ DEVICES WITH WAITS zJ FuMS / 
Wx I WANT TO TAKE EACH OF THEM SEPARATELY TvB PIG INTO THBM . 



A GREAT WAT TO GET FLEXIBILITY IS WHFFG We‘&z GOING To PLACE 

breakdown draw mo¬ 
or failing position 
ok mipple position 

OP I NTEfFMFPiATB RSlUON 
Q whatever. you want to call it ) 

- Between 2 extremes . 

whbpf do 1 ye Go in fi& middle? crucial! as wl'vf seen wm h$ wales, 

lr GIVES CHARACTER to liiC-MQVF Lit a TRAVELLER - A TRANSITIONAL fbStTiON. 

And where m par (Tic so important, /rt-Me secret cf Ah imaTon f 1 teilyou! 

IT STOPS THINGS JUST GOING mpiNGLV FROM A -fe S, 

Go SOMEWHERE ELSE YHATS INTERESTING EHRalfE FROM AToB. 

tEMppy HAWKINS; A MASTER ANIMATOR OF 'CHANGB' SAiPTo MR 

*PtCf< f PONT GO FROM A To E, 

Go Fp(M A to xTo F, 

GO FROM A fo & To R. 

GO s omm&& else in iTie middle!^ 

A Simple , Powerful tool - 

I FIRST GOT ONTO MS SY WORKING? WITf HEN HARRS, WHEN hRdCuT up MR 
DRAWINGS, OR BITS OF THEM, W HEP 577CK THEM DOWN. IN A DIFFERENT RACE. 

I ENDED HP FEEL HO SO STRONGLY ABOiuTe RFRAKpOWM THAT FOR YEARS 
I WENT AROUND RANT NO sJ RAY TO THAT / COULD WRITE A WHOLE BooKAmJT (T, 

(_ (T HA& o mjLOTOCCORREp TO ME THAT THS IS IT-) 

Lm TAKb aiR 
9- EXTREMES, 

OF A MAH 

Gom from 

HAPPY io SAP - 


RiXTiN Hit 
M tDPLE FOSmON 
WHERE ir 
WOULD BE 

GsetcMiy - 



218 







mi mm Bm kpowh exv&me 



Am ^ 

■Tty-' ■>;/ 




I'e Puuu> £V|gv Jasr 

%*L- A* 

fer .„, ■ 5-14 y ~fht CyMA/£?£ - 




■fte. CHAU3P 


USAS K&sp 

A.£. SVHP 
S*t P«Sf* ir UP - 



=T MCPP INTPR&SC 
MOP£ "O/MVSP' 


^ A Qtiicmz CHAf&B- 

- MOep YlWJff 


~ /4 QitiCKffZ 

Wi HAPPMG8S. 


(T WOUt&AFf&r 
1h* Cy$gi<$. m) 
MAfee -fte 
AHO <ScWE MORE 
OHANmi& muApPf 





p££P 

Ac, 'SSAAfe MCttfH 
OWOFlT VCMH 



■■■■:* 


£>.C- sAKP 

■iiWppy aw# 
ai-sw /rwp - 









/r viotp- 

P!SreWDTkt.FpC£ 

Op^rOiflKS 

"Ms eu&sks. Mem. pyps_ 

i I 


A T&tAUY 

PifpbP^mt cOIAMOS 


QUpP r • / 


Oil, Ott,,, 


219 















vo m go up 

OK QHP SfPE? 


1 NCE&&B 

He S MITE? 


Rtpucf ir? 


£xrpm& Breakdown &ctg&«e 



Fm*s Rfpdcf 
fht 


unhappy mown 


gvmJmr 

A SIMPLE BPHK 


W& cau Start 
10 Stitch mn&? 


L start 

to Be 

IMA&lNATt'JP ~ 




THINKS 
ABOUT l V 


FALSE 

COMFIPPNCP 




■= / KNEW IT 


6/w=S Seme 

MOBILITY 


OOPS, 


Something l et? 

OF 

Pap a prink p 


_ Yam Secret is 

" SAFE WITH ME 


220 



Can go 
ON UKE M \S 

fC?fZ.£V&IZr?t 


RXT&zMP BREAKDOWN 0K7IZEME 





THts'p Bp Be-Tmz\ 
IN e£Yf=jS££,,, j 


JU.iT A SMPiT 

I iRf To IT-I- 


Pi ft mass? 



r 


ITT TAD A ATS 


* f jf 



CONCLUSION J 

— —— ■■—— , N , | , , - —■ . _ _ _ — 


WHeRz WE Go WITH The- MIDDLE. 'TRAVFTllTCr pO§iT<oJ 
fiAS A pRORDUNP BFpFCTONTl- rt ACTION. W CHARACTER* 


l pang mV hat on THIS! 

MAKE The FXtR&A&$ (oZ contacts) THEN iCte Sp&AKDCWN (OfO 

Passing position .) Then /mm The next &£&ntixm'N &Tm ten 

The TXTfimE ** TUjl MWN SR&AKPOWN. KEEP BREAKING ft 
pom INTO EYEfZ SMARTER BITS, 

(Then do separate % Straight-AA rnC Rons on separate Bitsj 


221 








30 YmS> ABO WHOM i WAS FIRST CATCHING ONTO A 1C THE 'STUFF, I WoRKEP BRJEW/ 
WITH ABF LFVtloW, Km hARm's EARp PROTEGE- ABF PBEW BmcTiFUUA 2nd I WAS 

(Mp&3S$ff> BA ROTH ti<t Qmiry ANi> 3Uz QUANTITY OF His WORKS FAST Ak&GcoD' 
WORKING OH TgUFH STUFF, ABE PRCPUCEP 2 O to 25 SECONDS A WEEK WHILE -The 
OTHERS MANAGED to StRUGOLF THROUGH 5 SFCQHjS - AND ABES H/AS BF-TWE- 

I ALWAYS fZEMmgBZ ABF CAYlHS TO MB ON A TUBS FAY 

* PICK, iVf PONE ALLTkt- F-KTFFW £5 - 
■TOMQBROW / % GOM<3 TO BPTAKTHBIV AU-POWH. 

7 HEN Tkz £fST OF The WpBK I'LL APP \NTkt BITS W PIECES’ 


Maim, 

LEVS SAY 

AHEAP 

-JUST 

Moves. 

RWP 

ABiT- 


so WE 

c m 

PO THIS " 


—~A 



A g 



JUST 

Putting 

'ft ’jU 

BpsNOCNN 
iHTke- 
fAiPQLE 
i$ PULL 



as we 

cm 

POTHtS " 



THIS SIMPLE DVepLAP' QiVV £ US ACTION WITH WAN ACTON- MoBE bmGP-Mpfc UfE ■ 


mSiSHicEAW IPEA- 
WeCAHPO If 
\>m( SUBTLY 

OB WE CAM Vo iT 

brqadp/ 




Ones us 

y MORE BANG 
Fop ohr Buck 7 


- (GIVES as MOVEMENT WITHIN a MOVEMENT- 


AGAIN f 

com 


TFCM 

Here 

TO 


HEBE' 



A B 



PtiLFED APART- 



222 






















Km HArMtz would oftpn Do veK) imwssriNo thins : 


Tnoum Hf was #y com n pent of h is 
Animation AFiLim s. Km had aess 

CONFIPFNCS IN HiSDRAWNO- 

Hf LiKfd ro MAKS K,<\ll USB OrTke.- 

FLomeh skft&nt ey cguck Jones, his 

PlRSCTOfL AT WARtiFFS - sad LATtfZ OH, 

my ptmome Swings- 


54R P/3DM g£/M5 A LIMITATION, THIS 
ACTUALLY WAT AN ALLOT To K&l IT GAVE 
HIS Wm<A LTAmOT'Y^INSTTPoFHAVm 
FA C l LB DRAWINGS FLASHING AWN P ALL 
Ol'BRITie PLATS ~OV££AN(MATING f 



B 


l b often Find K&y making- an sxact 

TRACING of MY f>pA WIN&K oKK AiJ USING 
I f ws 1tie PASS WO PCS iTiOi -£#- ZL&TPoWn') 

SlCTHLD HAGS ITTO FAVOUR FLAW INGA UHL 

TILS -♦ 


OK 1Tb HjCF tT To FAVOUR pRAWm's" UKE 

JUT 



WATCHING WM DO 7HF - uj PfbiNGTtPlCllTV, I GRADUATY LFARHfT) 

To uHLTRSWF 3 tb) GST SLStT MOVEMENT WHICH WHS St//4-1//HP££0 


(smpis OVERLAPJ 



gay wl have 

A MAN WITH 
A Tug&AN - 


AND HF 
LEANS 
forward ... 

















/ 


17 


IF WE T\iX 
IN Ike- M \ODlt - da) 

MAKg if C-fOZfW To 

WF&eT THIS 
WITH il&- HEAP - 
W UXK WHAT HAPPENS 
TO fkl TURBAN AWSS - 

Irk SMCX in lu /V\ twit. 



Ti-ttS CPFATeS 
A U-&ATY NICE 
OVFRTAPPiNG 

OFltfeMAS^ 
ON A YFpf 
Q IMP PE MOVE - 



we've usfp 

OH# 3 Po&ffiOtiS. 

Tfc & 3 f mm 0 

SlpAi&Ht 

iN BFTWSFNS. 


we've PONE 'THf€ OH A BfAHP D&.KSN OF A OlMPlT CHARACTER. - WITH NO CHTHCF 
OF fXf&egsjCH - NOT 0FNA &UHK-MAKING A VERYOPT I WARY MOVE- 

A HP yer ir wilt have a not of uff .just because of t«z spacing . 

r So) WE POCK FOfF WAYS 7 & PlACTitie MlppLg Me&KCCMN POSITION - 
{OF POOvonK) WffFPF W& CAN OFF AN OVERLAP OF 1he~MANSGO. 

*MOVFMfmt within movement. 


4 PRAWING OVP-RfAP on 4 California -issue mouse 




224 































Of Couesi =, THIS BREAKDOWN FbsmQH Kind OF 1WNG CAM GETOuroF HAND. 

like everything base, nt how, vmm $0 where we use a: 


warn i was assisting Km 
Harris there Y m. 

FFTTUNG UKe 'TUI'S, - 




■ I P STARl IBEINC (DITYFR Kv 
T tfZW Tie BREAKDOWN OFF 

Ft Fetus - 



/ 




Km wo um freak out 'goppamn \t } dick ,1 just want a straight in between , 

i,M THERE l JUST ONE MB A STRAIGHT iNBETWEEN! THE GUY JUST BFIAXES HIS KANO! 

I PONT'WANT AHL THIS CRAaY FLASHING- APOUNP AmQVF&IUe PUFF KIND OF stiff! n 

(' Km NAP AVVjfci-i uF GcoP TASm.) 

Bur when I pip oft ip know how / when aJ whepf to use it / can almost 

GW I MADE MY LIVING WITH BREAKDOWN PRAWINW 

I OFrm HAD TO PRODUCE MASSIVE AMOUNTS op FOOTAGE AT The IAStM/NOIF- 
I SfCAMU UcjEPEPHONE ANiMAlofU ANIMAT W G AT The SAME TIME AS POiHQ 

Uhe business on To phone, Clients wocpd fantUYveCameio You Because 
Of high Standards - we poNt care it Yolk aaahs in Vt HOSPitap of m 

TiMBUKTOO - irk Youm&H/NOiT ON Tke-PCCF, BUSTER., — YOU FIT ir, f// 

WE USUAUY HAP FOOD STORY TELLING KEYS %-J EXTREMES, SO A IT I HADlbpO 
WAS JOIN A EOT CTSnlFF UP IN AN INTERESTING- WAY- I FOUND THAT A-l-AYTT 

Anything wipe Work, put it somewhere else in me middle . fairly 

i N TELL! GENTLY- IT NEVER LET ME DOWN , 

OF COURSE f WE WORK WOuIENT Be AS GCOP AS IF 1 b HAP WeT iME To ANALYSE 
Dud AHtNK WHAT Tie Heel / WAS TODIES ( BUT AT U IN Tic MORNING WITH JET LAG, 
HOLDING Tee. M/S PATH W A CRIMPY C UENT PHONING INK HOURS, ITGjETSYoUTHRCU&N. 


225 




























non m Comb to 4 -thing way a similar name - 



'MS IS m&££ THINGS MOVE ihi PARTS » 

- WHppB POPS HOT HAPPPM AT Tk-t SAMP TIME, 


TAKE A HOUTWCOp mU-BCG Ttf£/WAI& 
QtMOAPf ABOUND TO QBE SOMETHING- " 



HIS J OWES Wily N fC, H A 0iI Yf£<^ 

PfiAQ AS HE AT lit 

TURNS' DESTINATION 



ARP-i\Je HArp Down to nopmal 
3 no HTTP on <SDlM&. frAairp MtcoUr K££p&h! \ 

i Gam ■'mfisMmr i 

v W!GGt-&j 



/S -The* JOWLS PPA&" 'TtfiAky fee. H^utr cfTT. man action 

Tp THEN THT ' FOLLOW "THPCLtuH /y - BY IN. main achcH- 

'OVERLAPPING TTtOH'iVmiS OHT PART START FIRST ^ OVfBP PARIS COLTW- 


leit take at pi cal utterly bland, boring umm rke they had Ftp. tv aomef&Ats 
m ife* rfo's- 


iwc Ptl- 

cr-muFE 

i S ’ BOlHCr 
TO TURN 

■zA pace as. 




Nor much 
To WORK 
w ntf 

- is ir? 



22 6 



































\m cano coM-meurz To 1&&. Bottom gy pufr/NG in M &Quau>/ puuc Bpm<pom 

RIGHT ftt Hi e /VI IPPL& iW GO HOME, 

A<z mutkAhu said, 1 jm most pimeupr th/mg to po in animation is mowing. 

- you KNOW, THAO'S A V&2/ TRUE StATmWT " 

'Right, But Needs hchv wp Can make "nothing' at C-g&r iNr&&srf/fe.„ 

WH CAN TAKE The (UU&F OFF THIS. VpRY ORDINARY BIT OFACTION 
Bi SMPPf BREAKING TUe ACTION INTO PARTS. 



Tiff 0£$ WClim 

p&ogwty item 

First, isurwete 
^r«c/< with ocus 



Ttte FOOT First 


Fes ■ 



OFlAYteHFAP 

3m)1i(£ESr 


TU &4 ITT$ M0«5 ilte 

Stomach 3ad Hips, 
SrtiLF PeLAiTheHBAP 
shtTHpomihabhmk 


TtiMN Ss,Ve£YWN& 

Gtsrrues 
ivJihe H&P 
ffcauows MSP 


OR) St NCR MOSTOF OURBOPY AQnoNS START PROlU Tkt HIPS 


pass ax 





\np ( lu MOYe iU&Hips 3 ^ 

CTOMACH 

Fiesr: 



TAKRZA ST£P. 

Or ill Pewy 
T&eHm>- 



¥03 


Om^eFccr3-/l 

cveRWHn£Hm>i$ 


IH MID TURN, 
Tti/zm IN A SHOW 
{BLINK- 



227 



























































m HAVEN'T EVEN TtLTEP HIS HBAb OS CHANG £b WS EXPRESSION -BUT 

gmpih ey ovEmnme park w'vz ttrjEcmp gfe into a PEomvm smvoti. 






HEAP tSTlipAm 
AS m SfiSpS EA3K 
SUGHTiy 



Ok. OtUf^FiOOT 
Steps over 
as weight 

I $ SH;I | T 7^/fiS 



om 



gfiCK Tzor 

Rsjei A/m> 

ftsHizStlrm. 


W CM GO OH UKE Th& FOm/tfO,, 



PASS pVS. 



HmrAmv 

PnAy-fitetfWD 



.AiQhS our 
At scpv turhs 
VeiAY Ue H&£> 



W/MS* 

AG ARM S*V/NSS 

rs^mes> 

Hmo^nu. 

rn-Aygp 



Smi-ss 

AZH&£> 

‘TueAK 


228 










































































NO MATTER how PT AWVUSe ACTION {0 THATS CAUM> FO&r\N£ CAN /MK& ff 
Mom INT£l2£SnMC BY OV&UaPPIHO " 


PASS ft£. 





TURHUtG 

heat first 

M STINKWM 



MOVE WHAT 

SHmimzs 

H£ HAS 



HIPS F&UOW 
■the. SHOULDERS 
AS HZ STEPS, 



s lures ovm 

Ftcsr ^li&htl y 
3*J SetTLgi 


just one Uttlz p&aip that? PiFmmr wiu cmahbf zvmmm- 


FAS Ffc£ 




SHIFTS WEIGHT 
To ClfeSiDE 




Shifts weight 
15 omeb sm 
As HE turn 

i-f£AD , 

Farr t& SpOiHG ovf£, 


APM S' 
BALANCE. 
lzC SUNK 
Him. 



229 




























































So) ! o MAKE .EVEN lit PULLET ACTION OF- FIGURE INTEREST IN 

WE SPEAK Hut tOPY MX) SECTIONS - INTO DIFFERENT ENTITIES 
• 3 mc ) MOVE SECTIONS - ONE AT ATfME ( CoTTANTP/ OVP&APP(H& 



1tta,H&S> 
it tSttoui-Dm 

The. CH£Sr 

trt Atm 
f. feJ'fet-WS 

vumv 
'flu- ("KtS 

~tk<£.~ feet 



■ 


■And we Can speak it up into even smaller sfctomt if we pi kb ■ 


IT. 



"People unfold one part starts first, gen fratih g -fu, energy 
Foxother. Parts to Follow. - which thfn 'follow thkou&hl 
when A figure fobs from ohb place to another, a number, of 
things take plage no everything isn't happening 'at bam& time. 
We Hole sack on an action, -things Pair start oh enp atfr k time 

VARIOUS PARTS OF ft TOLY OVERLAP EACH OTHER. GO THIS IS W HATS' 

CALLEP in flu GRAFT - VZpLAPPWG ACTON ' 


SAMPLE counteraction 




Thefts hot much ToSHy 
Amur Counter action , 

OBVIOUSLY 
WE Po IT NATURALLY 

To balance OUPNfLVFC. 

ONE PART FoFS FopWARO 

AS Another part balances 
By going mac 

-OK ONE PART GOES UP 
AS ancthep balances 
$Y going-Town. 



230 


















NOW WE COME To ONE OF lP<e yfAOSr FASCINATING DEVICE '§ IN ANIMTON 


flbREAKiNG OF JOINT. 
\7& &IVE FLEXIBILITY 


AN O'EVEN MODE INTERESTING s 


•2U CCgSS/ VE BREAKING CF \ 

Obi nts 76 < 5 /^ flexibility) 




i-o- WT KELP ON Pt>tl\l& IT To pOOTeT THM6S UP. 


ITS QUITE A MOUTHFUL, JfiE PiOMEpR PiSHBY ANIMATOR VISCOVE&ED Tff IS Pi=ViC& 3*1 
ALLThoGOOD Guys WERE DOING IT, BUT ART FASSnr WARWkc OHE WHO GAVE ITA NAME. 

WHEN I NOTICED MILT KAHL POINS !T t l REMARKED OH Q w) MOT SAID ) 0 H ( WEll / 

You've qotto p q that. * i think if ib oaf) oh, i nctcf that You re breaking 

The, TO!NTS HERE SUCCESSIVELY IN ORDER 7b JWB FUX lSlPTY f " RED HAVE THROWN 
ME OUT OF 1 &e ROOM, 

ITS lot w Hat i& called -but what is it? 


' 3 TEARING' MEANS BENDING %±l JolNT WHETHER' OR NOT IT WOULD ACTUALLY 
BEND IN REALTY- v 

AND THEN We'Re JoiNGlb KEEP ON DOING IT CONTINUOUSLY 'SUCCESSIVELY ' 

To make tNinos timber- 


PiaTSMPLY, its this ~ 


WHEN AN Am 
<5C^. UP 

if Going To 

com back 

POm AGAIN'- 


& 


A 



Tie HAND WIU- 
KrtP ON Going 

Bur 

Tie ELBOW JOINT 

bends oQ breaks' 
Going Back in TLg 
opposite pimovcN 

- STARTING- ON ITS 
WAV BACK DOWN. 



231 




















NATWtCKfike FtE&T ANWA~0& To FMU-Y PBAW WOMEN, ALWAYS SAID, 

XMFVFS Am &FAUTIHILTO WATCH / 


IN Hit l c \ 2 Ck G&tfS FFlENO, AN/MATO&BILLNOLAN DEVELOPED 'RUBBER HOSE ANIMAToN, 
■IT WAS NOVEL- sU FUNNY S/A ICE NOBOpV HAL ANY BONES EVERYTHING FLOWED WITH 

ENDLESS CuFViMO ACTIONS^- LOTS OF VACATIONS ON ROOfts 8 k f FOUND FIGURE S AWHHG 
jZOUHPTP ACTIONS- 



Bur Now m CM GET CURVES WITH straight linesJ 

GtfCCFSSiVE BFFAKm JOINTS ENABLE US TO GETTft^ EFFECT OF CURVED ACTON 
BY USING STRAIGHT i-/«£5 

WFm FFm> FORTVEP FROM TtieTTiPANNY OF HAVING To AH (MATE FiimffiY HQJ^ 
l ALWAYS H6Um> THAT "PFAWIHOS THAT WALK W TALK' SHOULD BEANYT'/fTOF FiGVHB 
IN ANY STYLE f MALE OF FLESH AH P BONES, ’THIS OPENS UFA PANDORAS BCXCFSrtfF 
WHAT A TcOL! ty/F CAN HAVE BONES 2aJ 'QtPAl&HTS ' IN CUP FiGURTS. duel StHT HAY& 

fluid, flowing movement. 



Due 
FAfF IN 

a«J oar 



rfs $THT A WFULLY Pi&iD. 


232 







































1 NO WOtiT PUCK Ike, F&O&00A WITH A RUggERt$&> ARM - 




i 




/■/cw |/VE<30 POWH ike other S/D£ -OtoC^S/Vsy S&WM3 XTO’: 





W Tfl(S OXAiVPT AP-Thz 8m0 S <7ft v geMK£'A££r Pf//&£VU^Y POTPg.UA■ 

Wo HAVmr HAP To ACtUAUT BOHP OP BREAK AfifflWtf&lfe iN'RtAO WM YjET. 

£«HTVMS£W/) 


233 













































L&b po it again ~lhe el&ow im >s W -%e joints bpsaK in Succession 


CfOlttq 

Up 



'm GtOfMG 


mX&DYfN 


£ 


u?lk GO 
Ardoins 
in a oi.ea.ir 

Tl-TOW 
N&APS - 


RIGHT 
Aw a y 

~fl ie SOtNl 
SGhAKS 


W£ tup THIS. 
UXiKAT 
7t,e. Xk ! 


Mika. 
0?PO&T& 
PipgZicH 



8 

/ / ALWAYS TUttiKoP iT 
At '‘DOS 0^QUI5 / 

X 


ccmiNugp 


Its W/4AT A HAAG SATA PtTCHeg, Do&S. 


f S 

Si 


ATT A 


Xs again 



f a«tJ 7W/$ /s 4 

( G&ffi-P 7HHDW 




TTOjNTS &EZAK 

m opfmm j>m%w 



oh coapse ms \ 

TC-py WILL MAKh 
HU&Tt'vWtsS ) 


234 













































a WN&ro nt $&akimg iu e joints succ^/v&J is - 

m fP-L POp S The ACTION ATAAf ? 
mxr STA TTS MO YiUO AWSrr ? 

IS iT-ikt. LLBON? The Am? ITt SHOU&&2 AWAO? 

In' most b 10 actions cf-%& soDyJhe &ou(&£,ikv svmrortttc action is iNlfcHIfiS. 

pan cops w.. 

(5o FAOM YouiCf-liPS; LO\f£, 

FfSOM ib&HIPS, PFACIE: /x 

JAKE A MAH S LAPP IMG A TA&L&Z Jhe ACTION CtAIcT FfADM HlL (4lpQ- 



WL HAVE lots OF LEEWAY To AOCeNjiiAW Oai LYAG&LfATF &&A(<M6 j&iNfS 
FfCAaZl i T NAPPE!As AlLfkp Tim W PEAL/TV- 


(WNP5 




235 





































L&k KffP OH H (rriMG ik TABfh ' 

ITS an AWFUU-V GCOP &AMPL& OF How WE CAN ACHtEVB itte XAMB FlSXf&Ufy 
AS'FIU&&&. HOSE' ANIMATION MY BRBAKjNG The- JOINTS YWEg&t$L WE CAN - 

Going up - i i^epsow leaps oadike hanc> ppags. 




NOOK 

iwseg otfc 
MfPDLg 
Position t$ 

WS 

poo 


-fbe NftT ^ 
jgggWJCW 


HAHp 
KCWGg 
To #7 


Going pom - i&e fl&ow sniw leaps. 


Look atHH&- Stuff 
Going- on /n hbpf - 



PASS 

pos 


NStNN. 
LaoK jf 

vmmB 

OUR, 
MIP01F 

position SS 





The LAST w/ng To HAFP&4 N 
FkoARM fs cvwn surrLe, 
FiH&mS- AP£ $riU' PPFWP. 


Apso 


Am 

HOOK 
Wtf&p£ 

T’e.WgXT 
FPfPAUMH 
IS- 

- M/> f 
FHK ONES, 

FEFO'N 
COHTMOO1U TA 8i-£,~^ 


236 













































ONE Mom TlMZ - SHOWIH&lke /DEA FiMPiy, 
MOW G om To BANG Ms tfST ON ike TABLE - 


BlSOW 

UPAS'S 

GOING 

UP 


9nU- 

Gom up 



SAM 



a &H (3ofS Pom 
AS HAHP CcMtlM^UP 


s\ 


HAHO ft SnH- 

QC\U& UP 
AS pi-ROrY' 
Ctf^gpS POWJV 


rop&APM 
Samps pcwiV 
- PPGBAPt-Y 

MO 

}N&TW£&& 

-roike 

IMPACT 




as o/v -rtit pp&o&pm p/&u 
"77(6- jEpBOW WTS TktTfiBF? 
FtRST- 

rOt-!-0WFP BY ttHHsAMA 

rl^r 

= MORE UHFOIPWG. 



IF Am -It^'JO/NTS TO HOT BREAK At The BAMF FMB 

wfl l <ftt aU'Tm&> FummuiY wet a ever nffp. 



ITS i~;i<£ WHAT i/'-m Do WHEN W£ MAKE A P&tQL APPpAG RUBBERY- 
AHP iriS JUFT WHAT A BAIHH&E, H/HPU C-R CPiFTmu TpM PUT PAMCFfP ORA YAU DEVOIR 
RCCpHTPiC t>AHCPR POES ~ AMD FfeEp ABTAiRSl Ti-UFyO OttyM GOV OrTAI&HY BCMlPJ 
W si Oim To WORK YtfW "To GIVE Ifie mmCH OF CuRVAC-ROYT, F/ABPR- mofamtt 


237 
































Bating oh a bas s phum /ms a vw aqyqoh ro smoam 1U& tabi^. 



"1h\$ $mr Joint gumgSR cam pcok a wmty cowpuaw F/^-sr air Qik&oy 

tier mw re /7W it pyprv cuahcz you gct, irgecmm stem? nature &d Smpw. 


in 'Rmcm '- 



238 































































Kesupt- C u&fAQois, iwtou>iN& wvvmmr- awa with a izutar- 


Of £oaps£, p rummers do ar KittC& Of a-J flcm&$hes - 

BUT THR R The. BASIC PATTER At - 


&0/N& Up- 


Hit &FBOW 
AUeOU&HOUT 


CCOM/HG P0$U" 


W^COtCLD GC _ 

■SrPA(6Hf fTastt # 7 -fe '•£ 
CP- AM>« 5^74 
WflCSEAAM o?ul> 
A/^'Ve SAME AS ^6 
gift AeW>' fte.HANP 
AM PRUMSnefC. 


TftlS icitu. FAAVARH ~ 7fie-f 0&\ ■ 

/ < S Wcr VteRYt^aDO <-p/\C-HG - 
WA/eH NFE Ds /TOfatE AvAfETY- 



^IT 


239 
































AM OfcCmWA CONPuCTDfr gZGAKS JoiATZ iN SitOOpSSfOA/ Lifts CPfa Y 


laowMp 


IBTWtf 


BISOW GOJ& KoPlWfiO /& I4AI*11> ad BATON GO SACK- i-V'^T /TE^Ki! FCEIVAEc 

AS ELgoW, F/NSfiRS / SAToW 60 ,gACK - 


Upfe r^e ike■ VetY »/fercew om /iwf SMflFM# car A M osical. &&$'*** 



fr i? happehiho w m A peek rear - 




240 
































AMP TW/S is A fZgpiCW ACSTiCti FoP- A CCfiDUCTOfZ,', 



-fHfcfi ALL Gross ftmAFUy 
A< BUSarf 60SS BACA FUtZftffR 


W£KT g&ZAfS SACK AS tfMS&S 
W BATCH OMTili OB FVmteP 
&*} &I-KOW CrAiCfS FC^NAPD 


H-ANP m) WRFnSO 
AS msaiv AftHYSP 


it pocks cmsi-tcAr&> t Barwnmi ym stfft to think this wav ( ir ain't 


/rs BASKSAUM Tfa-e S4#te ACTION AS ( 4 ITTINS- 
Tk&TABPF Oft SwywS-'f&e BA-S'S PSOAI - 


((ZoiMl-y A^l 



CV&tiftti 7t) ii 


OTP A FIST BROAPPY KNOCKING OH A PooF 




CL-0% TO £ 


241 


.WHK-Xy** 























































APp TOTS OF SIMPLE LlTTCB ACTtoNS WHICH CAN Sp FNHANCFP 

with Just a tin y bit of ngxmm. 


£AV f AHAHP CLAPPING " 





M/0S.T IFAPS-'VP PRA6S GOING Up 



wp&T ^ds -Tip p} 2 MsGcmGpom 


Also, it helps to bitpl/yap 

Tkt PALM SLIGHTLY QMlPcHtr 

f on the contact \ 

A/Or AFT&tlU-e, HIT) t 

- Pizpp/Cp iticHAMb thats 

ppmofHT SFmnv. 


% 



IF it ic HAND STAYS IN 
itit SMie PFCF it WhU- 

LAO< VITALITY. 

WHAT WW FP&- 
P I^PTACtMBNTOF ft, e HtT 


AG.AIM) WE COULP m THIS ', 



&& 0 KTvm AS- FPFNODS 



Tit wzisr is&tpTAs 
ikt fing^h^p wcins 


may be hawno op c oulp nm cm 

IN BFVNppN Gmiom IN SFrWmi <SgPF iwn 




with one meimm 
Tiit WpiST Courp ARHiYF Fim~ 


AND Turn PISPLAC& 

ihe Palm on The hit- 



242 





































































Of CoufTT, APPlAt&f tm &PLIKFrug- 

so mb ppm /r Tb/s way, envious#- 


SpA/vl/S'W FM^AjGO PfiZgOti CMpS 
p(FFfpFN7P/.- Tips, OF FlTGfgS Ft r PALM 




pPCM A PPUNK' OP A PiPtCMATt iA Upp-OFA BABY- 

BccrTh-e PFiNCiptF IQ SrlpLTHte- A NVMFFF OF JoMK gfi&FONG, OFF AFT8ZANOW&Z . 



PAUP GotiTtFOFS. i ip 
AS FlLof-l i£)OeS Cova/ 




A VIOUMB.T' 

Crom UP 1 Zte wFsr 


!^A6© (MS 


Pf2/&^G- 


CoH//VS £t>W/ 
H/asr -smA 
a-M/>s 

WP-P/346S, 



± 2 - 




A Ma /vp flapping " 

(A M /TAAiAM J 

VmY FAPiPLY 
ON OFFS - 





c 


243 












































IB OF&4 Tff FIN6&S A S |WAlW 
fNmW&H GaiHG Up WOUU> B&OK. 


Sutom %e mi town 
P&G %e IMmwmhl 


!F WE HAP A BFtfZP ' g^TFfep GonjCf UP 

fW or COMf/Ct wm 1H& f&SSOPk 

u&To ipeiHwm- /c 


Oiy we'rl /MAwew a awl 




HAVtzikl WMT 

Ap£ne Bur 

PEWY tie HA,VP 




/US4/V, WA'CAV TA/CL ALP-THIS TcO FAR., 

gUT ThtTHM& IS To KttQW IT So WBCAH LS’L IT WHffJ AT WANT {WHICH TIUBTA POTT 


TAK£ StW6CW£fc HAHTi 
T-SCCKlpG /OfSfSTffeiC 

v (Sow© 

Qoopy f <TcoPi' 



fiWg£ TeJUST WAHT 
TO A BETWEEN IT 

FAvot\m<st 

TtATTIC-ITATT^ 







AMP n 
wcmX> 

BE FINE- 


244 






























































>E 16 OVERANi/mE IT wirHMRDKEN Ton 

gcop. f-grfe 10/ it 

3 



I 



2 



life- WREIS Lm> 
CLUNK' 

Now how about ms for puu-m it apart? 

3 

A- 




&-Bam GO F/RST - 
T HFN Iv/e/sTS ULAP> Our 


OR. 


y It mmr Be H/ce to have Just one RREak 

A S c 







S' 




ANp Com IN A BiT 

As hamps nop cms. 


i> 





So irk AIT A MATTER CF PB2R&F - 

Were SHowm th^>e pev/ces pizincipij^ in %e Haw- 
in The- cmcrsT Possible state to /mm ir Clear - 

To UMBER, Turns UP-TO Stop THINGS BEING- STIFF CH-Srtmr- 

we cam usEWm iwcmxm Subtly or oyerdce rum 
50 t kings go m:mmy ce mushy. 

Bur ITS SURPRISING HOW FAR WE CAM GO WITH jOditS 

TA have IT WORK BmUTtFUUY. 


245 































I i" 1 F ■ -ia-M MBI II ll l B|P|k nil i , :■ m.- -.w-vi,- I 11 ■ 11 II lllll I I I Iff I l |_ l j_ 

Flm&ILlTY IN Hit FACE 


' 7 Ti&mk a Tewts etfcv to forget how mobile our faClC Realm are in action -Am trk always 

SHOCKING TO SEE HOW MUCH DISTORTION THERE- IS WHEN We LOCK AT LIVE ACTION OF AOoRS' 
CLO&z-UFS FRAME BY FRAME. 





246 






















7 HE €KUU- omovt Sty ftww fue $M£ SMT7WW2 LOTS OFACWN l-IAPPmiNG &BLOW YUS 
CM££KBDR£&. OuC UPPER TmTH Pout CMM6& PC&rrm A& 7H#fe£ COCKER OmO CVfr §KUU~. 
~vt£ WWfi£P tdWfli JAW ACTION ic PFMApILY up W DOWN WITH A SU&HH PATERAE MOTION■ 




~fU 

TpNppvcy 

is 7S 

FPgGef 

jusr HOW 

g!6 0«/O 
MOUTH 

canty 



Ptfe. lower. jaw i s w/iVS£p /w Fj2o<vr cf- fte £A?. 



OUR 

Pewn sr 

KWOWS 

how 

/r fs^ 



AMD HOW SMUU- 
IT(7AiV APPEAR,- 


ACJ g/WlT OFTEN JolC Of HOF AFfFt ANIMATING Tht KFAUTiFUE EVIL- Qum/ MAGIC 
Ml PROF ON ite WAI4-'$e&F !H "SNOW WHITE W KeeJWEN PWAFf-C " (A W*zm of Rb\uSm THAT 
AO ONE HAP F/ffZ ATT£MPm> SEfORE, J FTALOHESUCC&P IN ACHIEVING) HE &G\M£ INNIS/TFP 

w hen animating cucse-ufs on %e 7 p waffs. he Got heap from Tie. other top men 

IN PARING 7 S> COMPRESS em) PlSmo 7*e FACfS. //FA/AW &(t>*££g&ME. PoNr BE AFRAID To 

STRBTCJH Tire. FACE. ft 



Th&ZZ A TENDENCY 

to have a simple 

MOUTH SQUlIZJAm 
A&DUtiP - FLOATING 
ON %c- FACE 



£ TR&TJ IT TO MAKE 

IT AN INTEGRAL pact 

OFlt^FAeE, 


IHePEC a TREMENDOUS amount OF ELASTICITY IN OUFFACE MUSCAT - 


A MAN 
SMOKING 
A PIPE- 


LEANING \ 
OUT 

Til, RIFE j 



Sucking- in puffing out 


247 



T&& CMBlWlHG t FoF m «fits * 


A 





F 





A£6F AFf^cZSp 



To(X) 


WPS 

«P 

FWTftafS 

Mb$£ 


Coum go fzom m or -mom posmows to aw am e m aw s sqo&jcf, vawiHg it. 



A&m^ With sqhabu smtorcH, we TP y ie> k&piu& sam& Amount of tmr. 

IF YOU TOOK IT our &uD WBIGHOO IT- IT WOULP WFIGH 7 fit §AMB- 



So, a&mm, nk wm /s amm ? fat, small , ou> t c&& t 

A OOPHFT/CATFP p&F&OW CH&WIN& VtSff&ltZ A TRAMP WHO HABHTFAWN For. S Wm&? 



V££Stf$ A 
lA&OU&SR 
RATING - 



248 






athimg you opt&J &&£ Good Across poinG* 


£ay someone &m Ffcmrm&o - 


irk c&uof 

JUST TO GO 



if CAM (So IN StzcriOKS " 



Fi®>rlke.pi£' THmik^HCm- 



from om 

To YU t, OTHFR. 




Fl%$r -ju mow, ru&l fbe> NO$e<- Tngb! ike, 




mOfo&Fi&r* /i/o££ SfM^reWS- JAW pans 9^ 


■#■ 


249 






START WnV %«* eVSS -THE A/ Km? QOiHg (‘OPy Vit CHMOE COULD TRAVEL "fe- FKF - 

AS t^c- momt/-/ ovftZUPS W STg^ro/eS 





6^V soMBQuh Di&APPQhrrm - 


StaDt 

FROM 

ITS 

opfostm' 
'vw&Mmr \ 

H-APP&N /ViOP&j 

srtowty ./ 

w / 





THgtf ^ 
A,lOHT>/ 



props - 



Tkt m$&>w W aaw 

Rf^BS^ f u RRO iVS 

JW CM )H GOSS /(V. 


'//£ AW* K/VOiY 
1U&7W0 FACH" 
"foe- 

wmie face 
where 


CONTRADICTION: 





Pitrr/AlG 
A BRAVE 

face omit- 


SIDE OF'the FACE IS FELUtie (IS Om THlHQ Strike OTHEO SIDE >STEMMING US ANOTHER 



lb uketo Animate One Side separated/ W rw&v Animate -$e- OM&Z, 


250 







INSTAMT ££AD~ TRDFtLZS EeAt>AS/pry 


'T?/£ HMSro (SO /.'V -f^e- SOCK £CVM£tW#?£ and IT MIGHT AS g£ H£& 



























~To Finish off this Section zhJ a& a Kind of R&/tew^ 

Hehes an exam /H FFFXIFIUTY- 

AN ASSIGNMENT AFT TABS (If gave US TO FPACTiCF SUCCESS^ SBfpkingJoiNts 
(7) JaKt ifie FRONT YfBN OF A FEMALE £ WAVING S/DE TO SlDE. 

( 3 ) Have the, hips, work in a figo&z 8. 

(D nave ik^ Head counter, ike- body. 

Y±) HAVE the. HANDS WORK fNpEPENWm/ Tad STEAK iU,.JOINTS. 
hiFEES 7&e S CRigBLF I MADE As ART &FToar iu& PFoBtfM’ 



Wfps 
NOfix 
m ft&jfei 



Kino OF A SCARY TfOBdeM *3 AS / WANTED to do it soft of RhauStMT - EVEN SCAFiBF. 

OK, WMAT DO WE DO FlfST? (iWNKS) DUHHH,,, HEY] OF COURSE -Tfe (j<Fi) - DpmtUo/fP) 
7k ONE THAT TENS -ftw Stogy- 






A/HATO NEXT? ff 
(thinks) 

OfTHOuTty... 

The NE*r FXjtmE 

WHEEe sHbTl Sway 
Toilte other Sf 'PR— 

- CAiTTHlO^iS 
BECAUSE WHEN 

I act iroixT 

I TAKE AFOOT 
V-x A Second To twoe 
.. 7b ONE PIPE Aid 
!4 SEC To SWING SACK 

« ( second OVeSAO-, 


252 
















V. 


■ - ir a Cyci-p 

' '.'.e l :ARTpzr 
• eePEATEPLY 

■ :r -W beets. 



y. * 


2*%- 


iV^ 


sot so 

- v //sic® - 

■ ■ - 1V5 jLti I 

- SfP 0 ZCW 6 ; 

c- Fc&mcri: 

' vsSV 1/|6 


C 




' S tVAW/Vfc 

vv^y. 


Jl 
C * 

M r 


-•:£ H/PS 
•lg.^/ 3 . 





+ 


■5 

J 



. V. t 


2 , 

— w/y 

■- 3 

>'fVGf 

■,r rflfiS 
: ‘ 1*1 
V-ZOW 
£OFF 

- : P/P 

■ ’ oriv^ty 

m * j j \_y 

_ i * 1 f 

: . JJ. 

Bgjje. 

■■■ «">_ g fr - 






Fu r //V' 

ii&T To ^(i_ 1 
FWSH/M 5 " 

“u tZTH&Z 

OVf& ■ 






iV Pur in 
Another. 
£XT! 20 iM£ 

HEX! 

PUlWti S' 

H 5 ^ 

Fft/STHEE 
0 ’V££ - 


c£v< r»> 


253 










/.'01V tr LOOKS 

UKE ITS Ai'L 
SC/W& TO WORK ' 

,7«c* We caa/' 
kind Of iZewAx, 

~EAKiNCr iT DOWN 

outn-ifO 

■\-i mjoy takino 

Ofil ~f\!c Celt 
fe/T 8y 5/7- 

PMTTJAK 5 /A/ %t 
-■AIDS CiRCOHG 
0 THER 
CliEVy £ 77 S. 


“tfk ow/tera 

APE SIMPLE d) s- 7 _9 

aom OVER —^ .144 — 1 - 1 




+ 

5 





s 



A.;.' CDM/A/6 back 

A - 


/5 fq 2.1 ?,2 25 


/7 l 

1(1 



HK” t 





254 























rftm aw in ones iv^omiocrr- gitrufflj&ji&c 



255 




















WEIGHT 


■ ■ i 


Twe F/jesr QifcSTKW / FVF£ ASKEP MILT KAMI- l/VAS:' HOW DID YOU EVEROFF 
THAT JUNGLE KOOK TI60Z TO WEIGH SO MUCH f' 

Aiy^W,' W£U-j I KNOW WH&tZikc W&tGRTK ON EV&RY P&4W/MG, I KNOW 
WHERE Tkt WEIGHT IS AT ANY Given MOMENT OH %€ CHARACTER ■ I KNOW WHERE %e, 
WEIGHT IS W WHERE ITE COMING FtBOM WHERE ITS JvSrTRALELLIN& CWER- >w 

7&e WeiGHT /C TFANSFEFRIH& 70/ 


1% vj£ ALREADY Seen that (N A walk we fee Like weight oh it ie dowm R£/t7<3V 

imssf ^ ws& jseajps as ir iae weight, A&sopsmTUt, wrct crike move- 0 

But how about other kinds of weight? objects-light? nmY? flow po we show that. 


Oml way we cam Show how heavy an object /s - 

- IS BY iUt WAY WE -prepare lo PICK TUP- 

Jc Pick up WEIGHT WE have 1Z> PREPARE TOR- IT ~ To ANTICIPATE Tt\e WEIGH I • 

obviously Picking up a piece cf chalk, a pen or a feather doesnY 
require my prepncavcn - 


P>uta Heavy cione,,. 




BHJ. /go F&EUHG OF WEIGHT 

irMOSr BE A TopSf/PW£ Took- 


we cam Suggest we set PYJuLT HaVineIHm 
WALK ATOUHO ir - S» 7 WS ir up- 



Howls Hi 5 Govtc-To DO THIS? fid CcNSltXglHG 
WHATHEk EkOlfEr lt> PICK UP- HOW H&NY IS IT 
Hpk AKnCiPATWO WHAT r& GoiHG To WEIGH „, 


256 





















MAYB& m pavf HWEl&e Sc-RBSt-lTo HAVE tf/M WALK AQOUtiP, gt<TCm WAV 
M01U&Z, m g?oih6i& MTtcmi£'ti^mt@ur 



ne l t> c^wi'V $??m> m peer 
nm mp S£N/> h£ ^ 


U&C W»HAT 

1H6 S/we 



Qgx AS £lCS£ to "/&# lAt&ISHf AS pC&l8l£, 




ADJUSTS WMS£LF ^pvj 6o£$ £4C£ 
SC AS TO NOT PAmA6£ AS H£ HFTS 
H f i ' SB-F> HE pO£ 5 NT 

WATT A 



T&m TO e(ST 
MAJP^^ATH^o 

W0SHT-/VKSHT 

adjust n&riN 

uittwS' £fT& - 
e-RMTCA^y 


jS4CfSA^3H 

^evwes 

AS pe T&6? 
TO S€T A 
pUpCH^f. " 



BUS MCfeC OA WfMTEW, 


257 









a may carrying A Back of Potatoes on his sack smz >s 90m To ccamreAi^N cr ^weighs- 
Trn WEIGHT FORCER WiS SO&Y CKOS&LTo-lke. <&6ViH>, K&PfNG %e- KH&ES Starr aA MAKING Tie f^-T 

^ m.s AUm, Tk& peer also spwy our To form, a odptoftpipod to spew>iSe wpigfIt ohfr 



a r-ARmr area. 



fmr tour 
com OFF 

Jke GROOAp 
VERY M tiCH- 


A ixror j>/Frm&iCF in th£& waits cx. pms is p^rmihs> gy weightiIk iw Mim BtaMutts. 

IF A Pem® & CA&TiHG- A HEAVY BOCK- 

He weight wouU> romp., tie W scpmii f«- arms , '%rKKt> ^ heck couiTGcmtom- 


Chuw sutewny 


HELL /M/E 
MOBS SLOWLY 

BtJ-ftk f&py 
WILL RAISE 

ONLY BUQ-fU-y 

ON. The 

FASO IMS Pc&ffiON 

^rTke-RYXK 
WlU- NOT pAiBe 
AT'ALL, 


-HidTmm oFtb&rm- 
Gould be erratic - 



AGAIN.ifo 
Prn^iNG ‘poor 
WILL HfiWY 
LEAVE The GKOuHP 

rite kn&es w/a 

P$TAA,iN &NT 
ALL-TEnTim 
ffXM Te WEIGHT, 


STEP Pause, STe P,$T£P, fiMSe, Step PAUSE, Step, step, Step Pause, eh.. 

<y<) fa- could glide pApiury ^ rnm prop it 


258 












































A HAND piCKm UP A m< 
HANPKfRjOaibf TYING ON 

ik^ zNcoutit0p& 

NO ££S/STA/viC£ - 





£ur A /-/AA/ 1> PieKlH&ttP A OJOCX" 

mt Qda[s/» iA/mr wa-Ai's To fa. ma&WM- 


~~tbz w&mr 

OOTkr- m&K „ 

swsm^ws f 

pfre ARM 

dJ puns 
iU suam e£ 

P£ s WAf. 

V 



MGi£ CFH&P 
COl(U> Oppose 
&HoOU)fiR£ 



Hki Am & 

thOPlHGTo 
SAUAN CE. 
Tfe %OCX 

IN TPeBSf {T 
HAND. 


PICK !AG 4 P A FfATH^Z 

t^kr<soiu& to haw an y &mcra/ t&e SoDy. 



nmPSlNQT'ie f£AtHf&StfApB **—s 7 c» V—^ tff “foe MOt/^ ^A£S 7 &t FTATHFR^/^I 
o F Ca > A ££, OMe WAV 7 D <SFr H / F / £wr /S TO ££ OO /^ CYOWS - OF IT. 

-fit Gm\r an mrofn, bhttytta &4y$~ 

vV 7 % Point ts that you art not /wmry smrno a pfnc\t ascnt gar You flAm 
wmnrfN Your. W YOu do wnaw/fr you pos^pty Cay wtm rwr w&otfr 
To comfy Sm&roN. it i$Asmuosu foa m ad i am caixicos oftA ir%e_ vm . 


259 































5AY A f>m& 

41 A Eaucom ; 

7h AHSHf 
jtsrsrMsMfW 

a sir- 



A HAND PF&S/N& 
OfJ WAT&? 



lb WATjfR eur WILL. P0LLLV HAY& 
HTtW= 


-£/&■ peep a Ffw 7HffJ6S IVHfetf F*«. 4f Pirm&tTSF&frS BECAUSE OF 7 l&fc WEIGHT 

d<d mAT'THEY'EP AAAO& OF, 



A £tuK MAi^y 

W(5UU> CATCH A 
C^TAI*J AMOUNT 
OF AIR AC IT FALLS 


frRopS 



HAS 
AIR 

^ wiu, T»tf£>W piCAf 


+ 



HAS A1IS 

awpgp. ir 



A NO Semes 



T-i^FA Ctf/AM Cwp- 



* 


A HgAVy 

ovFPeo’fl* 

FALLS - 



CATCH£5 
AIR 

Bur pftcfif 
FAST - If 
WONT 

IN It* MS - 


/WKiSM THIS 
WCULP HEY0E 
Sgrrt-e AT ALL- 1 



0OOtk£, 


IN &Aurylke CuF WOUu> P&O&ABTV SHAIf&L ON IMPAQX 

but m cm HM£ /r ScuNte Aecufto a mu 

■; r AKF Fifi^T/PS wtw &0A(-tfi But mKe >T APFeAjZ &UWAS&. 


jo 

w )M/t 




dcoAce 


Ice 


Vt f 

Bowte 


£enm> 


S2L J&*.. 

pause Tffev (t sHAnms 


260 




















A FAWNS LEAF WlLUUNG&S IN IhoAlW 

AIR- CuRmtK WWAFFfCT IT' ifO FAi-F 
is $plH& RFQt Sf£P BY Tk& Aid,. 

r\ s ^Asp , ^7 

r 

•r 

WCrHf 






ikt,lMmGt OFTWfS 

wok.f-D m smw 

dui GfQ^fPUL-, 






s« 




,>e 


i n? um£>i/ys fs (?fsisr^> 

BY WATpfL - 

A £/£W SKIP TOA WA£-T• 


A mv SMA4- 
"V WPPt-^s 
towcw <5if(CW 

P/SKIf%T£. 


S/4a*£ so^r OFtmc* with 

A Plpcts OF pAPW PROPPING 


a pmmpwrm 

IMJD YJAT&&- 


c 






Poem FrWNG ~ 


(A ^ 



peep A RccK 

of so ~&q ms.- 

RjpPtj&M&trGP 
To%t v^rv ia>£F 

CFTiefiDMP- 




A gA^OFMUD- 





TolHPS SHrif^ 


CMDgOV^P 
WcUU> W5*P 
wrmaMg 
££>A/vJg& *J 
Cewspow 

FAST- 




MAKgtf 
gave g£>® 
&M IMPACT 

-rtieH 

FMi. ■SjjOtyZfl 



261 






























gapfv&lhe suPfacz is soft - &om c&zvs&g. - rr wouu> &t ve- 





?&i C>%& 
FiN&ZS 
T~c> <5(VK 

PR&$UR£ 


A^AM' w pickiMG up soMmm hfavy i Hi^whol£B coy will- h&p 

Amp Tkt so»peg op . x 

-tfe ACfKW K W t/?£ HI PS ' / \ 



/W PCmG UP A PENCIL* 

^t. scwete of tv /cmv 

/g mikisHS&i, 


* oBwou&y 



262 










































4 vm Heavy zoc falling - A HA&> gp\? PW- w//k - A sn# aw- m eotw-we- mu- raws •■ 





^ ftSEU-ftt IMPACT-H« 5t>X IS p/vCTAU-V CfleN 
4f ff/# MOMSWr CF tttPACr, 




lr 





-THEN ROti. ASA/N, 
it CWPSWOTSQlWfiH. 
"the sound ewes whsn it 
HAS ACTVAH-V UTT1** G*8U'4> 



whem it rins ,t goiMtfS ar hm/Wepm'W Raus ib a aroP. 
SHowtteCCAfTAcr 


gur it pois sesrsquiiStf 
a«p iMft&mm rises. 

A tfffMiS KAU- WW- Si^tlASP ON iMmcr 



PR££SU& is part of weight 


&&U-ON 


Ff&Fil& 


To uCfi/NS 

A P0ii< - 


Twew 

Pj&SAW ITS 
Op' &>NAh 
$HAiP 



TH0&£ Distance C&mwa F£om -&*rr, Hmo- wp'ff trying to move 


263 


























































HOW MUCH EFFORT PO W HAW TO EXPpHO 
(T) To MOVE FOMPTiHO? 

@ To CHANGE Its PifWCTiOti? 

(D OTTO STOP IT? 

Y/itT 1N PICATF HOW MUCH it weighs. 


J 


Coming To a 'Stop /s r aft of w&gmt ■ 



g&/&S&S 


■&L 4 DES 

CoMim TOlUe PND OF A SUP&, 


WT- 'fl£ fHHOWH 
OFF 8AIANCE 


Tm wtco into oufUW action 

- UKE CODING CPF Aft ESCALATOR . 


FrAHKTHC/MS SAYS" // 

11 WEVF GOT TO to QOMmtUG To Top We. FOpWAZD ffzCG&S&m OF mpZVABTP WEIGHT. 


! THAT0eR 
WA% IN N\0HcN 

wiu- my 

To HTTP oh 

GOING' 

Ag/fti, HTAO, 
HANC>S I HAIR,, 
PRAPBZ y. 





Go W£ STOP 
in Bits- 
each hit 

IN PI CAT! HO 

Tit WT&rr 
OF ITSELF. 


hprtW Miur Haul on it - 

* SroTPm wms CONVINCING^V IS oh a of The DIFFICULT TWNGS70PO IN ANMATtoN. 

Wft&i You com to a stop pick a Gcop Pitch to s top. How You cmcoatto ZtoP- 

WHAt KIND OF A Stop - WHTTUPP ITS AH ALFRT Top OR A (ATT ONE, CHOOSING WHERE 
7 O Do iriS AN IMPORTANT CHOICE. I HATH TO &FFA FOOT Com THROUGH dT LAND 
3eti THEN N THING HAPPENS To IT i THINK WHEN IT LANDS WE OUGHT TO 60 AHEAD 
ni PUT We WEIGHT ON IT- OP POCK FORWARD - OR RAISE We OW0R fCoT.* 


264 





























So HOW MUCH FFfVPT (T TAH&C TO 'STOP £0/AffWN6 SHOWS ttOW MUCH IT W&GHS . 

AiTO/ ike SpmD OF AM ACTON WOO PFfFRjWNE HOW ViQimtiZcePfAPFpy /g - 

IF A MAM /S RUNNING WITH A COAT MAPF OF TTN, PONT MATERIAL- W HfCOMfS 
To A SUPPfN STOP, The. MATERIAL WUM CONTINUE To FIDW l To ITFP OH GOINS ~ 

Toqoahfap of him /NPFPmpmvf Turn chop $ act iud $&) 



Ours- ^AVffFiAC coMnwDrs $Frr\£> 


A WoMAU IN A SilKMimr/F-.. ike MAtmAH Will Blo&Soi k ^ Flap Violently. 



SO 'WHAN SHF STOPS', HER ClOiHF S a»A HAIR Follow THlZOJ&l A/^V/A(6 MW ACrO/, 

a A/D OF corpse, HER AWN ACTION ALSO $X>P$ W PACTS’, FINISHING UP AT PlFFEPfti T 7/MFS- ^ 

HA& THFPT EVER BEEN AN ACTON WHFR.F AlF~fk<& PARTS OF A PODY MOVEP UNIFoPM.Fi . 
I EXCEPT IN p0$01^ %iS PSORAm NOT EVEN IN 

AGAIN, 'fOllOW THROUGH ' Ffhe RESULT OF wJ T QBTFRATBD B/iUz /H AiN ACTION. 


265 





















J§ar f&e om WAY WE C4N gmttX 5HCW W&lQir /S wnu Hit ACTION. 
SAY Wp'&E PfCK/AI# HP A HEAVY BATCH OF HA) WfPi A PrrCtffCEKr 


\ 



anticipates iht Tppcw 

BY GOING PC«iV - 




3*Y>K 

A#XH 

gzvtzpses 
AG AW 



266 






















BACK To U FTlH Ci A UCCK A&MH - Wiffl QU&S&SftOtiS £>F HCW To p$EN< THINGS UP JNTFfliSSVN&I-Y 





one H-Awp 
STAm SACK 



sot>y srm : cmr m 

ttAHpS POmYGC 

eacc atwsamp 
time 



fmps DcwM 

SuT HOPD Hl3\p SACK • 

apmss? niettEs s«r 
not To&erifeg 



tffAP £T<H- 

fipMPWHAT PElAVS?. ftrgp spin, 

o*i£ hand pfscess soMewwvr 

-Jlut, OTHflU . Pg-HAYS? • 

PNC rWO erflttS 


J|W£ 

fWFSP; 



(££A£S WITH 

<?Tffl=f3. HAAID 
COMPS 
p£?W« i-ATE 



apji,{st< Burr 
Sioe *i& sii>£ 



StW&H 
AA,nS AHJJ Top 
scWSDS HP 

U3S? SffiAleHf©' 
^HGt+UY 



WftS AS £cpty 
<se«& ?Ac^opc3wf^ 
7^1 

vi em& 



to sopy. 

Lg^SHAKg. 



Kmpt¥£&& 

zmr&ce. 



tmsTP* i6W®iS- 

SQjtfe-ToTP/w/rr. 



Losgs, 

gccp sops CH€& 


his N@d 
mv&sF$ 


jpecov^ 


267 





















































A /VWN WffH A HgAVY IMU£T /S <SO*W3 ■£> irCtiAN AHVIL- ' 

C=J 

^ W(1H MOST gf© ACTIONS gflr« 4pcH SICK A£cH - 

-ftt hEj-Vic- mass 5rwtititu.«pcrf Goes Ccrtv^< 

ft n ^ A 


$TMZ& ItC&tfc AT 
WHfRe' &>tM& T& Hit* 




HWW!' 





WPS 
Ftipc T«or 

Fenae. 



'Safest- 


w^u-er Art P 
c^MUOSO PW RiA-ff^- 
AS HEAO A«P Ai*MS 
STWir rfcAvJAAP 
©Ml? p«NW 



fefwgsw Hepe 
Wi WpHtr 
" no ifiewi^afc 


*** ^e^S! ^ 




Trti= S5UMP (o* -We ACOsNT') Cott<e> 

a-i ute fpame AFnrg this , 



j ir«wies 


3acF A£dti 
p« 5 /e( 3 as 

Afi*[N 


<S*v! The PPPCWP AFUSgL lZ*. C 24 TACT 

aww-et jTwgs -JIM./MVIL-- 


SO WE IK/ TO f(ND AM^-fee. 1K/2.IOT5 fOSSfB/M77P$ To OaNW*/ WEIGHT VlSUAUX ~ 

Can yifjmay pajzts ? 

QO FAST AHP> SlOA ? 
i{SF VtP ANP DOtfH p 
Bmx-rk* JoiHPD p 

p BYBR.&F'flu- BoD Y p 

SHIFT iU e WEISW r P 


— AAil> SFl-TCT WHAT \F£ NFFD To PUT GYFfY WMT WE WWT, 

AA/O WWET/ I//P Av£ AU-TMS STUFF W BttXX&TpflW - CONCFNTEATF OH PERSONALITY. 

AlHO K T>OlM& IT Sett) /A/ HWT SiTUATiOH ? 


268 
























Pmhu tti& ?J imm to cham 3 £ ptmrnoN si cm i %c weight 

m Tatuim a eom& cmm chappn pip a famous skipping ok hopping tuPM- 

Hp Skips ZOCiNP Ike Copn&o iti A CURjfF puNS OUT itu OtHffL WAY- 




l iKF A MOXOkPlkP H'F LEANS INTO ihe. Qu&ifg OF %€,ru£N- THE F&TT ARFCFFSm at 1U<i 

tti gp/WWIS To /AAKe SKIP- 

ip animation - it m skips fop about a secqnp ~ . 

A WAY To Po THIS Is to MAKp A HFFIF2 OF DRAWINGS FROM Z To 0-4 (lvFN NUMBERS ) 

THEN MATT A NOTHTF &F/FS f . OFF&T GUSH TPf / FROM 5 'b 23 (_Ot>pNtitygT&S) 

THAN UP iNTEfZ/TAVF T HEM. (WfL MCPp ON THIS ■$£&' VlBPAVONTj 

( pahcimg) 

Gd FINISH OFF THIS SpCTlOH OH WEIGHT WE SHOULD jNCWPT pANCiKO. 

Gho Season f t hat Hit essential part of panc/no is not whats happening to Fum 

Bur WHATS HAPPBWNO To TkcFopY ~-(t<e WEIGHT -The UP TOWN OF Tie, BODY- 

pm HAfTC a«J APT BABBITT WERE BOTH SPECIALISTS IN VAN CL ANIMATION ^ THEY 
fOTH SA IP EXACTLY The FAME THING' C's The.- UPANP POWN QNT&SOlNHANDS 
THAT is Hm MOST IMPORTANT TH INS IN a PANCE- Ifk WHATS. HAPPENING To TUe pcPY 

WITH Thz. WEt&HT MOVING Up 2*3 DOWN IN RHYTHM ■ 



Turn we CAN puriUo FFFf ON ANYWHeRF- 


269 












































































How i-ste,ril-i*- HP 

pfaw-y thpoa^u. m>y 
up a«.d down' di 2 

Swm&Hu APJYS AZCVNP. 
TiHie BPAr 1C OH i&s 

&VE& 4** PRAYMIS 

is Art zxtp&me ~ 

•f fas is au- on ones 

%U t) JI\ST NP&vS 
3 SimuS MCp£ OIZ UE^S 
STRAffitfT MBmWmiS 
KEiWfrt each Pxrpm^. 






jo\m 
£® 

tv off mr 

NTlClpAC 
t tip 




+ 


d - 




270 







































































q h a paw ce -yiriUe wyt cw we F&pcitioWEtGtti al’ 1^sow oms tovn. 





+ 


+ 


S3 


p CWH 
cw ‘fft e 

t* 



JSAX 

ftEY£R5jK 



+ 




WE CAN accent ZiJH&l 

-the, pcWV GdHieMP 
OF ike SOP y. 

<p/v A t>AKC&, tF we Bet Most 
OF ike PIG G&O&IZtfSHT' 

THEN WE CAN AUACQT iitHOPT 
ills, urnF &EATS OR TFCONCmy ONfi. 

Pont spam p t/me 

CW Hie. PvFW/Tf2&WU- - 
AVVWNS iHSS THAN 
Wr Fp-Nmi WONfpEAO. 

Gprikc AAAW Trtiin ft&tT - PzAHY Ft&fl ■ 
7ft£i\f spppcRT irwffH ifcaypAPi &m cn 



271 


























































"fe HlfS Tmi SpCULEPRS 
TpUp To COUNTER. RTGH 
OTHER AW'lke.VMB - 
£HOUU>FR Fcm.HfPOp 
GHOULDER UP, H IP POWH . 

TTvisr y&e s^py - 
H^AD at OiPFRRm AM6(£ 

to SF0UU&2S. 


<W 

LEAN 

tffl&lbe RcPY 

Top. PYNAMCZ 


Wm ChaNEWS 
Ttzmoiv 
t-f&OWnp 

HI «- H/rs 

2 £fU& 
W&GtiV 
SW tPTS 


with pahc&s-notice itio Tw&r w-fte §houu>&& 

A£ THEY OPPOSE-fuo TWIST m Tko H IPS . 


0 (V ~fo& CtoTCTfla WTT 

T^pti 

om&rm 
oar 


OH SYNCM£OHl£if& itit action to a musical beat, th^rf are 2 RmleS of THO/m: 


{ rule of thumb #i ) HA VEHkt visual accent position occur, 2 - frames aheap 

v- _ J OF ill € ACTUAL SOUND - PRpCF&ME Ike SOUND S/ 2- • 



So '/VF tAAl EiTnVfi- ANIMATE Ifte Hit X FR4'HK AHEAP OF Ike SOUND 
OR, )ftE CAN ANIMATE LEVEE WITH The SOONP At 5 AWANCEiUt PlQVRE 
_ v IN -ffte EDITING, LATER 3wJ OFT TOO FLOORS RIGHT Ft MUCH pRffm this) 

of thumb 'zj Many pm achcn zbnazs often Furwht visual Hit ahead o/^Ti^ imm 

-- OFYfre CN&AlL BEAf( Wrrii a 1 2 FRAME BeAfTHATs i Frames AHzapcfH? SO N£>'\ 



as with dialogue, i think -fue &E$r way is to animate Levee with iUt Sound -then fiddle 

WITH T fN The editing TILL it LOOKS JUST RIGHT' ALSO WE LEARN TH/N&& THIS WAY AS £t,!t££ 

Of thumb all only what they ape -rvl ?$ ofthu^ rf?v rr&id see what works best- 

MAYse its gErmCONG FRAME APVANCEP, MAYSETWO, MAYBE % OFT MAYBE its SESTI^VEL, 
Art never gemr late.) 


272 




























ANTICIPATION 


is there Atixecpi mo pcttn't know what this, guys going to po 



'to GREAT AH iMAJOR -, BILL TYVA S Mt>, 

iS T WR& ALT OHPf 3 THINGS IN ANIMATION - 
r .——\ 

1 ANTICIPATION I 

2 ACTION I 

3 REACTION J 

AMD TMf'Se IMPLY Tie. REST, 

learn to no these things well 

dL YOU CAN ANIMATE WEU- - * 


CHARLIE CHAPLIN SAID, 


1 T ELL EM WHAT YouRe GOING To t>0. 

2 PO IT 

3 T£U_ 'EM THAT VOUYE PONE IT 


273 



-;7,e QppAX FffllCH MIME, MARCEL MAEC&U SAYS, 


\ ^US£ g/a ‘ANTICIPATION?) 

why? secausp tf communicates what is com To happen- _ 

/i.iiP^CC S££€ WPAT fS GO IMG To NAPPeN - WHY SEeTr ANTICIPATION 

aJ 50 T/#y ANTIC'S PATE it w ILH aS t TNaV So lira tfS . 


WY? PfCauSe FCfL ALMOST EVERY ACTION \NE MAKE THERE IT AN ANTiCJ PATCH ■ 

m think of things first -than w them. 

UNLESS ITS A rPTTTOGTAMMB> RESPONSE LIKE SHIFTING GfAlT ON A CAT 

or GFTm& pppmotp we Know that we think of so/nmi we fifsfthci po it 
As with speech, wf know that our Spain fixes upon 1h Sense of what 

IT WANTS 'to S/iy -THEN OOFS INTO A VFpV COMPLEX 5£j0£S OF MUSCLE 

Detections to say it. 


TQ / AitTlORA VON IS The PREPARATION FcT AN ACTON, ( which we all &goghis£ wm 

ANTICIPATION TAKES PlACE IN ALMOST EVERY ACTION" ^ ^ 

W CERTAINLY IN EVERY BIT ACTION- 




<- 


AM tulip A r es 


Acnon 
— CoM0 



lilt ANTICIPATION IS ALWAYS IN Th& OPPOSITE PlFTCTiON To WH EPFThe- MAIN ACTON IS GOING TO GO. 



- Fl-OP$ 

any action -is strengthened fv mm ppegeepef enrs opposite. 




ofcounseA 

WZLCOF 

POP. what } 
s Hir / 


274 





































































if action, i s nife,tyna£ copy 

w NAVE ANTICIPATION OF 
'IJcpMS'NPOLiS LATENT FCRCfS. 



USUAlPf ike ANTICIPATION IS SLOWER- ii$2 VIOLENT 7HAU The ACTON 

CLOW ANTICIPATION ,., ,, ~ZtPl ^ FAST ACTION 



gpmt Sim wwt> HP TH0W pim 1 U BCPY INTO IT fop 7ti e IS 


A FUNNER WILE <Ao BACK B&fOPe C-k'iHS FofiY/ARp 




ANY ACTION CAN BE ENHANCED IF THERE IS AN ANTICIPATION BFFC&Eitie ACTION, 

(fiS) WF CO BACK SEpoRF WF Co FORWARD • 

' WE GO FORWARD BEFORE \NF go BACK- 

m go down Before me go up. 
we Go up Before we go down. 

The RUCK is -' KffoRF WE GO ONE WAY - FiRDf Go Tie OTHER WAY, ' 


275 


























OF COUPSE, WITH A "eAdroOti' CARTCOH ' 






ANTICIPATES HE pxtr 



F&mps 

FiNGFR 


-■ r «\T : c.— t-_t >*.!■■- 


m pmwms going oar— nes justgche. 


anticipation happens with smaller. tJ unl>%z&atel> movements 


(Setting up rm a chair f we gosackcefope we go Popwapt aJ loan 





MTtCiPme SACK Q0f% Fo&WARP UP 

To Go FfrRWA&P QAd PCOlN TO GO 


QomcNe /waking a point - 



W0AK ANftOiPW 



aJ Weak Point 


NOW, MAKING ACTION STRONGER ' 




pAEPAmo Boot wk sp&tmy saw flrwapp 

Gom SACK FIRST //VTfie OfHXiTE PlPPOflON /uAGN/FIPS. ti. feSUL-F 


TAKE A SIMPLE THING like - s taptn&a walk- 


ITS UNNATURAL 
To start a. walk 
with The- 

FAprmr fcct 

fp&TA Ha 

PIRFCTtON 
W EEE QQIM&, 




Th t OBVIOUS WAy 
TO GOTo HIS LEFT 
tsrosim wrr-M 
HIS LET FOOT- 

S TART ike. WALK 
WtTU Ike. FOOT 

NEAREST To 

where He's Going - 




27 6 



























































Bur He Coulp 
AHTiapAm 
WALK with 

his mur ft or 

UKeiHis - 

his right foot 
could Pack up 

AS AN 

ANTICIPATE- 





&> 

AlT&TJATUP/ 

he could 

ANTICIPATE 
HIS WALK 
BY $/CKiN€; up 
WITH HIS 

pepr Poor 
in ofLom 

TO FREE 
HIS RIGHT FOOT 

7 o sn-p over. 



A ballet PUe 
IS AN ANTtOPAVOH 

stjcrz jumping 

UP m ihe AIR 
Jo Do AN PMRBCUAT 

= Vi\&&UN&F&J 





' f&t Q}(*-h> 

V 


A Nm ON A p/VlNSt BOAPO 



START WITH UlcpSr'L&S 


(back Agpu RjWSZSmJ ‘ 


AHOJHTP- 

ANTiCipfiTE 



(arch R&mss 

' AGAIN) 


277 














































WITH SMAirlER ACTIONS - TAKE A HAN0 WRinm - 



but jmr by mrm&iH a smi ahwpavs up Btfotm uz nws - m rm- %& mzson thinking. 



oe m can use rMMW/Wr TnmmeAu G^Srwees as ANnappmcH. 

Gay a srtcmu wcwah is Gom to pcfTHtsR Hand on mpl* (nr a a) 



278 
























































IF SO/HpQVfX GOING 
lO ffiT SOMEONE 
H£WOUi£ 

anticipate mow 

Bf~jrORF SW 1 N& 1 N& 
Forward. 



~tl* ANTIOlpAVoN 

Tm^us exactly 

whaFs &omevo 

HAPPEN. 


!N ike EARLY DAYS OF AMMApON He CONTACT MAS Pi HE HITTING? A PUPPING " 






Qiom watwick said, 

"at D/s/Vgy‘s t learhfp Hon to pflneF A punch Fpav\ aRt baSP/tf 
ART SAID,. ' Pp/y'r StfCW -fftfc /MNP H (TrlN&IUe CHIN. SHOW 1H hand 

after /rt pas -tue chin W Y3e chin //as /vtcH'SO our cr pmcp' / y 


Iffe HIT WMS 
Hstwtuy 

HS-Of&p 

4 FRA/MgS. 


iS/w w^Jwsr 

SHOW Ihe RESULT 
Trt&REK 

no Point 

OFCCHTMT 



WE leave our 

-ikL CONTACT 
W SHOW 
Tie. HAND 

pmriue: 
HITTING 
POINT 

' 10 TIMES 
The IMPACT 


Km HAfZmroPMp THIS IS WHAT THEY PIP in old YVES-TERM FILMS. 1vpf WOULD EPlTOifT 

-fee s font of contact' ppamfs to just show Ik&RTSuLTOFlke Htr*d Pitta big BANS at tr. 

CO, YtP puriCitSDiMP HIT WHEN Ike FlSTlS PAST Tie FACE - WHEN ike CHARACTER- f& P($LOP&&> 

Tab-fUg .arm s wings 'Through * we oft~ jp£. impact, ike suzfigth from fe dcplacriviwt 
AgaiM, 

Ihe ANTICIPATION IS- WF fT&PARF foB~lke ACTION. WF BROADCAST WHAT GOING lb Do. 

'7 he ONLY TROU&-F WITH ANTICIPATIONS IS THAT THEY CAN BE CORNY. 

Who AUDIFNCT OOFS* AW SURF, (KNOW f / OpF, NON YoiiPP GOING lb Do 'THIS „, %0&MS, r . 

CO THEN Tie GREAT THING /£ To DO SOMETHING DIFFERENT' A SURMISE - 
WHt<W CAN BE VERY FUNNY (_OIC SHOCKING .) JUST PONY VO H/PM 1 &CPE&Z P. 


280 















CoULb SAY rm Am ANTICIPATION IS AN EXPECTATION of what mile occur. 
THE AUpi&iCt &cpea& SOM&MlNQ To happen before it actuary HAPPENS , 

A SUfyPB-ISE GAG WOPm WH0N Ife AUptzNep $=&DS Ifce fKp&OrpcflON W ^^73* 

A C^2TA//V THING Tb HAPPm W TfW SCVH^W/AG- <?«/7£r P/FmRfNT HAPPENS — 



1?ie INHALE IS. 
TUl, ANTICIPATION 







jMHNS ^ANTICIPATION ACTION 




INHAIE K /HCC£ ACflQV 

anticipation 




MCfcfZ /NHAPO ACTION nshCVON MOPE YETWC& 

mope ANrtcimcN Cfz&sm-T m&noN &mncN. 


281 














INNISILLT ANTICIPATIONSJ 

A WAV TO OAT SNAP' WHICH ANIMATORS APT ALWAYS TALKING ABOUT IS THIS: 
CAY A CHA&TTH£‘ CCMFW/N& M TOLY CuRTPi^lMG fa J LOOKS UP SpCHTUY - 




VYB Pqr IN A YFTY FAST ANTICIPATION ~ A PPAWIhlO OF TWO IN. TU OPPOSITE Pif&CTCN 
FfcCM WHITT WF WANT To GO- Ifk Too FAST FOP Tie P/F TO SpF tT - ntjuST FcfZ, 
cm op TNO TFMFT - irk IN YlTPlT "lb te,lT/F BUT WF fTPP IT THIS GIVES iTfte-SNAP 


Gay A SCCC0T GOAUF /S GOiHG To STOP A BAAL Wtffj A OjfZCUMP FOOT FLOURISH - 


/ Z S 4- 5 



OF Course, fu FOOT FUomstt (S TfSpLF AN ANTICIPATION OF CATCHING-fa Tm~ 


283 

















7H& DEVICES NFS AN EXpKA PUNCH To AN ACTION SY INVISIBLY ANriCIfAT/NS ANY A&nctf. 
llt rut SAME IWNG AS A WatuZAE ANTICIPATION ' JUST<30 ike. OPPOSITE WAX FII38T— 

mr only pop. one, two oc three frame s . 

A BASEBALL PLAYER HAY HQ OUGHT A BAHT COULD ANTIC) pm it ANTICIPATION Cf MS THROW 

For jm T 2 . FRAMES - 



ANTta. FORWARD foil ZF^MES- NOW CO BACK INTO TTP NoPmaY ANTICIPATION - 



// 


whenever p&s&t&LE wetzy to find an Anticipation (of mrciAAmii) moPT'tt action. 

OnA SAID/ \\ r i 

TT SIMPLE. 

&E PI/Z 0 TT 

Bp CLEAR. 

* PT VERY SIMPLE. 

make a statement- .. 

W FINISH IT-S(MPP/. 

Co. r . 


AND 


1 WE ANTICIPATE Ike ACTION 

2 PC IT 

2 W SHOW WE'VE PCNEIK 


X 


AmapATiOM LEAPS ON NATURALLY RIGHT INTO iAKm ^ 'ACCENTS' 



284 















TAKES AND ACCENTS 







Accmr /> 



TtilS. /S Tkc. BA S /C PATTERN OF A CAEOccN TAKE. 

HzFT foliom /I OF foFWOS w VARIATORS ON HoWftfCCb Tft^ 

WcRm> OUT (M Hu, l r f30 l S 2tJ KO'S _ 


285 



























but mt& w£‘f£ Ant { wb could srRm&THm oa(U?Mit W£ by APPtne (M 
a slight up AHwacm&N of me pom AmciPAT&n ab hbtai^s a cumr pock- 


a SHoer 

HAffytfZ Ux >fC 

S£pS 





semes 


Hzm A FOPMUi-A FOP AN OfiplHAP-Y STKMSWr UP m) pOYM TAKE (W / Fbo\*%$& 

(r«sts Vi&HpY' type rmm) 

8 M 



+ 


town on twos 


glMLAm 



2 3 4- s 

pom owe |_(—|—|—i 

( 2 3 4 S 


on 


I—H+l 


5 


sue ACCENT 8 

is, cm -mens 

A , foR. -Aemm 

\ U \ \ trt&1 ITS AW^&i 
AC) Off ftk Yffl 

VOHti To #IL 





$(6 /s-fite 

POSITION 
r ^x WgRgA.ft 

0^3 \ 

°2 


S b 7 


a 


4__I 


UP ON OftpS. 


IO 13. lb 
1 4 I 

44 



££>WM ON TWOS 


/ 7 



9 


n & n 

44+4 


tfp on oam 


powh m "TWOS 


286 



























/teen's Hit SA t m mm gtfTwrrH f s* \ 
warm &> SHom -type t/m m &- ( jw <m%, 




Atm, tie acc mr 

IS ONiXtttT 
A'£ /ri‘ ALftAty 

EM (SOUTB 14- 



8 9 to tf 


(%■ 13 if 

-H-l 


pCh/M ON OftEST 


rnm fpom fit 


t 


7 




svwf th \hg wttu in nw-mr NX airway . 

(tW<£ 5 <?/V£ fctff ■= % <SE&) 






? II IS n 

TWC& |-{- 1 - 1 - 1 


We Can exagge&ne &/&xthimg 

as much 4 C Like INIhe-pg/wm 

fXiTTbi& AfX QTANmZb TfMIN&S. 



287 
























7vvo& 


POP 
7 foT 


H&&& A S/M IMIS- QNE- 
iht CHAm m Ibe- sm£ 

AQ ikt /WOifSP -AU- OH TWOS' 


A<kNtijtkv ACCmi^l 
cs Fppr -UKEAN &JJZ7&C 
SHOCK %‘A its AL&fiOV ON 


TH0ZE a& Soup Woburn foizmupao - Eurwp can Staff g&n&Mct& /nv^ywf-- 



Uppo 7 'Am OHF that PA S7B 

Ji&rov&z A RXT(IH Wigs) 



/ 3 6" 

OCWH , j 

ON TwCS ’ 1 


£■ 7 B 7 [o. 

(j-H — f — j - ’ 

6 c3o up ON OHPS 


// 


/fppp %e FYF$ 
ittd MOUTH 
<Utf>SEP 
UNTlU'tCie 

ACCPNT 1 9 



N jS (717 

J—-1—+-H 

POWN ON TWOS 


288 




























NOW LETS MAKE IT KINO OF A DOUBLE TAKE, 
WP'tF KEEP Hit SAMP CHARTS BuT PW&tius HEAP 

mm sk>p 10 s up mw it 'squashy 

cm ns WAY up TO *tl. 


Poplin nm> 
SHAPE, 0£3 

2«J mrrH 

OtfAit 



PCW CH TWOS 


(-OtUG UP OH OHP S 


>*d BACK PoWH Oi WoS 


MAYBE (IS 
CLZA&&Z 

SHewm tr 

TH-tS WAY - 


*—h 


5 



MAKE 6 
KAVOWZiKG- 
F'S&KVR&AE 




it 

4 


a 


/? t$, r i<{ 


1 



: 1 






WK SHOULDN'T WORRY ABOUT piSlcKmP PRAWILOS OP 

um action has tfrttly ptsiopm> tramps . 


Bar we op on to nmmgnz what ike. obioihal vopvm of a chafagt&z is - 

AHP NOT STRETCH C&MPRESS FORGFTVNa IRIS VOLUME — SOimiHeamCTfR 

chanofs overall site, 

MILT KAHL SAIF, " / h&PItte SAME AMOUNT OF MEAT IN A TAKE " 


$ur WE CAN 
Tush tr a pCvHP 
LIKE MAP - 



289 









































ME shouldn't BE AFRAlP OF RETORTION Hi % e INTERIOR. OF AN ACTION ■ 

Om PRA \\>mc OR IMAGES MAY LOOK GRANGE f AT m REALLY OHM »smy^> FcSfTicm- 
WE imie PI&tORTiOM WITHIN uO>THAlt WHAT COUNTS. 

THERE IS WiHD DISTORTION W E&N IN JHVF ACTION W WE CAN GO FURTHER.-— 


Going, down 

INTO AN 
ANTICIPATION 
loo ib Exmzr 
THIS - 



Antic. 



Hh. BfUY 

GOES DOWN 
AG Tkt LOGS 

send ~ 


But heir tejavTf Stomach area 

fOKJURT % fRAMRA ON S FRAMES oR. 4 





ctcf par 


AS WE 
ACC EN T UP 
1t,e OeLF 

Opts 

POWN 
hi P&AY 
tr %,s cPA- 

fPmeo 
Hkc TToMAfU! Gcf& tom 

G mas- mrofiNAi- StR-Tch 

WjU COMpNESUCN . 



epu-v CATWm 

HP a s Hp 
Wantoto 
CO fWp poHN- u. 



Tilt HEAD COaLDCtC UP A&Tlit TFT GO DOWN 
WHICH ISAM ANTICIPATION OF AN ANTICIPATION 


fZFT 

CcaiS> 

PPPAL ' 


AFTfT-Tht Head &*) Boot pane 

&PJUF? ike ARMS GOURD MOVE INTc 

a position to taka ike cugre 

OFF Tu t- HOLD. 


ANTC. 

Ike. 



HEAD 

leaps - 
all b [Rb 
follows 



This, is hcw Try Avery p id his iwh-p, crazy takes - extending cn a Sprits of Ccmiuno actions ' 
Pelayihg &m, often .just 2 frame s AtWor -a serifs cfactions Cumulative rbsutt 


290 
























AZT BAmrr HAP A GREAT PBflCF FO&ltn HANDS At 7k BNP OFATaKF.- 

WHICH LOTS OF AN/MATCHES UTILISED ~ 

A FTEZ Ikt TAKE, WHERE MBS QOMlNG RACK TO NORMAL (jF WFNAYF ike Ttm FcC If) 
HAVE Tit- ALMS MAKE AN ELABORATE Fu tR&i 'ON ONER. - VERY FAST 


itizAms EACH 
SWING APOUNO 

in a Circle 

COtiN TFPJMCt 
EACH OTHER • 



THEY can MAKE 

A FiQiA&p 8 
4S LONG AS. they 
(COUNTER 

EACH OTHER- 


Tho Left Am dors Tie Same as Thu fight - Bar starts lateR &J counters it 




Another little refinement- - Ike arm could kefP knocking m hat off aj on again^ 


KIN O OF 
CHaPLiN ESQiiFtf. 


WED NEED 
A MINIMUM 
OF 12 - FRAMES 
FoRTHtS STUFF - 




OTHER-ARM 

Corns. UP 
7(4 KNOCKS 
TktHATTbe 

Other, way 
— Or puts i t 

BACK ON. 

His feet could 
fepAe in ike Air- 

“ FNPLESS VARIATIONS 


291 























its a corn mm io took rot an gmA x smt<wm'' l( . 
ik sAi a man sees something ourm&EOus mJ veux whAMAAat i H 



jy® wm pc I5e job ok - Sunmvs icon fat auothfr kk&kgown - mortmpi 

POKiVON "WAT Wll SrR0N£W&N ff&J OiVE US MORB "CHANGE -MORE VTTAUVf- 



So m icok tor. what&ms can <gne us more change of shaft wfhih ike action* 

lArk Fur IN ANOTHER. ONE * HAVE HIM ROOK UP BEFORE ike, 'POWN ANTIC! PATTON ■ 
AmN, WF AHFapMB Jku ANTICIPATION*' 



wfpt m panels. of otmmmmc - of <sm>m~%e my here - Bur its 

APWAfS WORTH 5S3/V6 ip Tt-irfifS ANOTHER MOM INTACT poSrr/QN fOS&IRlB Tq 

emm mppa catmst- Mem change within, (main, th#&a 


292 























HAVING TOO MUCH ANTICIPATION CAN SB COMVSOMETIME jJ CW-Y TAKES UNNFCb&ARY 

Jmrro contbadct aim mis wlp, up down W abound action, oneOF ittSWNG w 
takk I've ever seen was in a film wm basil rathsohf as ife vilanM, 

hA SMACK iNi&z-MlPPUB OFiic CINEMASCOPE S CJR&N BEING < 3 iV£jV iNFomtVCYt 

BY AN AIDE WHICH a HOCKS H/M. 


'[I-iBBEa TOTS OF ACTION behind HIM W Ammo HIM WHICH COULD PFFlFX €0R ATTENTION, 

yer his, 7 ahe jumps right out at you, ha happly moves any piStmos at ala, yet 

You ReAUY sab itI THERMS NO ANTICIPATION PCWN ^ NO STRETCHED ACCENT PART 
Ofihf reason wbSfb it is mcAusp his Heap /<s fpojen in ih. muddle of lUv screen - 
(Viz 'SACeeO' cWTRAL oval) his head a short SHARP move up then cushons sack a m 






Tie. U&A£> GCA S UP TO*A ftSfc/WCfivr) iii£rfy,i&. 

-Turn cushion sackto^ii wa ww Hold, 
tub tak^th#!, /s 3 fm 0 tom went a 
Cushion pack. v _ J 

(7)z s 

lL 


ihz SfAHm IS 


CUSHION SACHET 


So, IF WB &FFINF A TAKE AS A STRONG AAe>V&miT TO SHOW SURPRISE OK REACTION, 

rfs succeeded without au- cup animation devices, rgn&jfz useful they areto us, 

LIFE DO&tfr FOLLOW OUR. CONVENIENT ANIMATION FORMULAS- (jmCrUDV ANY LIVE ACTION) 



(Setting accents right was ike-wm that am mf^ most - trouble in animating. 
I really hap to work at it-if it was a soft accent wfh a head op a body-op 

A SHARP, HARP 

%i f 


ACCENT OF A HAND 
OR FINGER. 

- fUiS HOW LONG 
TO HOLD A 
HAND Ol/TTHmE 

to reap? 






* I S£C, 


TRV To POIHT A 77/WSS m A Sbcond* 4 accents, 
ifs ppgny HARD To Do. 4 STATIC HOLD* OF 
G FUMES BACH -AND HOW PO YOU OPT FEOfA 

CNF tv ikt cmmP anyway, fvB Found that 
Y ou wm> ATwfi&r ofomfr id &ad ahyaglet. 


FEX AVERY SAYS ns 5 FRAMES.. YOU 

NEED a MINIMUM OF 5 frames To mD 

A hold. ten's, stuff went so fast 

THAT 16UESS it WORKS AS ENOUGH OF 
A PAUSE IN The COMTEK T OF AILTHAT£PEg> 


293 
























Finals y i caught oh- as usual, Ik*. Szem' /s kind of s/mplb! nv just 

GcFTOHO The PlfrFmCF BFTW&&4 A HAW ACCENT A SOFT ACCENT: 











T&y uti fbiHt way mo 
yout fihg0z> m% to 

Bounce SACK, OF-go up 

ae com oit&fw&A sit 
if won't stay static. 


£ 

Mp A 


SOFT 


ACCENT HBBT'S OH GO Hi 


G. 



IF m PblHT 

G&wi life hand 
wiu- casern as 

If SLOWS To A St>R 


wm a hard accent - 

IF m FIT AT MV IB WITH A SP&L HAMM&Z, ife- AMY (l IS OBVIOUSP/ MOT AFFEO jgp 

m Hit TAMMm W when ha/mep comes -pom it bounces back . 



-mis BouTqs. SACK 
i^%eAomr. 

The SouNP a U&Kz* 

/ mm Afmz fautyr 
IS WHbRFWFG srfte-SoOHC 


SMFimuA HamaipR 


catmtf 
fop- i Fsme 


htA it MMmiuy,- . _ tn , ,, \ 

BotiticA* BACK SU>NS INTO AfDM>) 


mfflkG A NAIL - He ACCENT /S NOT WtitN %t HAMM&t Comas in, NAIL. 




H or Bjm rws ewe. 


Again,T kt Bound is on 
TU^ &OU.NC& back 

- onw Fmm aftwz 

Tkt CONTACT. 


ITS. -mis' ONE. 



A SOFT ACCENT WILT KEEP ON GOINS 

Think of ah emmm 

CONDUCTOR CoNMOnNSr 
WALTZ TEMPO- 



W€ FBBL Tho ACC0N T 

A.mjrtfgm 



zJiurnp 

ON 

mr 

Accm: 


294 





























<30/M3 OUT 


F£lT 

AC££NT 


A ha(U> Acamr bouKcfc back 


--y-—. - 





A M/W POiMTittGr 

H£ FIHG-EK. 
mPHATiCAuy- 


gouttaifc am 

4 -- 


(j awou&k eomiMm a pa&> acxou stops A^m'-cR as A££yp£y as /tcan, ) 


ON&<~> 



THINK OF 


mr 

A tear 


A WAjLTz- 


WfZF&gL 

ike^Acomr 

OH$& 



1 J 




t i 1 







,4 SOFTACCmr OQMTIMU0S 


i & ! l L - Jf mpy^ri | « 



CxO(i{& OuT 

- p. 


fm 

ACC&$ 


W stru- -spem mo oa&Aozmr Barite, movem&it continues . 


295 














































a ume ewr f Amd cmppiue ouj, mie Bou^ef back m a meo agcbht. 


b 57 ? 


S Pm>iM& 
Our imoitc s 

' mr' Accmr w t 



~tm &OMQ& SAW 
i 3 £“79 

W m K peu> ^ 


7A^ 3omcm ^Hoorm - mpu&eiu ova mic impact 





/; f - 





04 

res 


0 

l_ 



3 


7)91 5 




-l 




WO&gri%e S0lAU£> OF ike SHOTAS ike, GDI POPS BACK 
WITHOUT AMY IMSPTAlppYiP BaSTH0H OpOW§ PACpLTO UQfcMAD 

3 


Bounces back to 
oRi&mu Posmou 




IMPACT 

SACK 


A Soft acxmt 

* lb Be HAPPY To* 


A HAPX>AGcmT 


w 


WHY 



TMPY 


'/ 


COMO ££ SfcFT 
HA&O* ^ 

■ pi -mem oune 


// 



i 


17 


cs 


tsS 7 <f it |3 /5 ! 7 /? 2-1j» 2£ 


m 


i.i. 

1 { 

^ 1 




1 

f ■ i , n 

; i 


iPetT 
ACO0K 




i 0 7 


19 17 if /s 


I H ‘ ' } — 

Bounce sax 

4 - 


4mr 

1 


'$UT USUALLY/ HEAP 

Acmn m up 

££e K t>iAio&J£ f , 


296 



































TIMING, STAGGERS, WAVE AND WHIP 


WE HAVE ART THAT Cm FLAV MOST PiW WITH TIME. 

we don't pave -to NomAL time. WE can either go too fa&t-tg get spast/c 
HUMOUR, ^ FRAkrtQ ACTIVITY- OR. go too S LOW dvJ get SmJTi ^ dignity. 

Years ago a scientist friend of mine showed me film he made abound T$e. 

WORLD OF men m? ANIMALS - A/O/VE OF If CLOT AT NORMAL SPEED. IT WAS ALL 
INTENTION Ally FILMED Too PAST of 750 S LOW, PE HAP ELEPHANTS RUNNING 
LIKE MICE vG VICE VERSA, PEOPLE IN RELIGIOUS, RITUALS RACING AROUND AS IF 

flawing tab, people kissing in slow motion, etc. after an hour of this 

YOUR MIN P TURNED INSIDE OUT — GIVING A KIND OF GrO&S EVE VIEW OF LIFE 

'MJ action. 

there was a shot of a tramp on a park bench putting a matchstich in hs bap 

IT WAS FILMED SLIGHTLY IN CLOW MOTION, 30 OR 32 FRAMES A SECOND. AS HE 
FIDDLED With 1ft«- MArCHCTICK You CAW LITTLE RtPFLlNG MUSCLES OF PLEASURE 

spread across hid face which You would Never, off at normal qpeed. 

TH'RAHGP, Bur COMPULSIVE 'VIEWING. 

StHCE THEN I'VE ALWAYS TRIED To AVOID NORMAL TIMING, / ALWAYS TEN TO GO 
JUST A LITTLE TOO FAST W THEN SWITCH To GoNGJUST A LITTLE Too SLOW— 
COMBINE IT. GO FOP ike CHANGE, Tk& CONTRAST. 7 fa. SLOW AGAINST ikt. FAST 
KEEP SWITCHING BACH wJ FORTH. tl£ HARD To DETECT Burm@£ CCMfULSlVF VIEWING. 


IIIIMI IIIUIS h ■€■■ 


!■ u.'l> tTJ J Ai i n-rti J. 





QTAGGGZ VM/NGC 


j 


mmm t^-oiwhi 


THERE ARE several WAYS To STAGGER DRAWINGS EACH W FORTH To CAUSE THINGS 
TO SHAKE OR VIBRATE, TO MAKE HANDS TRFDMSlE OP HELP wrtH LAUGHING 0%CRYING. 

WE MAKE A SERIES OF DRAWINGS OF NORMAL ACTION »W INTERLEAVE THEAA 
BACH W FORTH IN DIFFERENT WAYS To MAKE THEM SHUDDER W SHAKE, 


297 



TRp Simplest Tom of stagger, vtmmoH /s this - 


5Ay we want 

A FEAfONATREE 
TO FLUTTER, 

IN Ike WIND, „ 



W ARE ike 2- EXTREME aW WE CfuST MAKE 7 EQUAL IN 8EfWm/S 


+ 


h 


THEN WHEN W£ &(fOSB 
tr ON OUR. X- SHEET. 
MSrmp OFiht USUAL' 


3. 


9 


MP WE'RE NOT LIMITED 
TO JUST THAT, FOE VARtRV 

Hold so/mp for -z or ,2 
FEMES fad OTHERS foRONE. 
Jit AH ERRATIC EXPOSURE' 
IT PEFENC& HOW vtcmr 
WE WANT IT TO Be. 


/ 


4~ 


- WE SKIP ONE fad (50 
FORWARD fad THEN 
Com lSACK dc<- 


±- 


OR SKIP 
A POUND 
FOR Arnes 

Violent 

effect 


Jk. 


v/$m ions Also 

WORK WELD 
ON TWO$L : 


7 


& 


JS. 


z 

9 


4~ 


T 8 


/ 


± 


*t 


B 




r 


ANY COMBINATION CAN WORK 

THIS. IS iUcPmOPLE 

OF 8TAQGERED BXfOSURR 
—.„ _ 


«amvG%mK 


8 


ANOWR WAY' 

TAKE A PI VINO BOARD VIBRATING AFTER, Ike DIVERS DEFT IT — 



WE MAKE # / P W 17 


ilk SURPRISING HOW M HCH You 
CAN Repeat EACH ENP i #1 To #!7 etc. 

am> when ir slows to a Stop 


; 

n 

2- 

3 

fS 

4- 

14- 

■~s 

N * P 

IS 

c 

12 , 

7 

// 

e 

to 

9 

e/c.. 


op COtf^SP WjFCAtf AWKS 
MOEg FLEXIBLE PACING 
POSITIONS WITHIN Tk& 
EXTREMES 


mrir 

WILE WORK WEAL- 
\ EITHER. WAY 



T JESE ARE Ike V/RRATiOXS MOST 
ANIMATORS USE" FOR PACK OF - 
A NAME I CALF IT Tied UP ^ DOWN ' 
OR y BA(JK fad FORTH f VIBRATION, 


298 


































































































Tm CAN BE USED for. LAUGHTER OR- CRYING: OR SHIVERING WITH COLD: 



NT (ETC A YA&ET V OF SPAONt S M'&lA&ON. 


GHE ONLY PROBLEM VI OH IMS W IS. THAT IT tf&tS TO SB A BIT MECHANICAL - 

We cqulp break it up by doing more iNiERE&nHe parsing Fc&moNS with in it. 


£>trr ifo Really great method is ■%*, one developed my ncrman fergusoh at fr&NRYs. 

Km HARRIS BHOmO tr TO MB HEN GOT IT .FROM SHAMU& GULHAHE WHO GcT)T FROM 

Ferguson, for pack of a name, /k cupnie it 


. m 1 1 1 1 H il - 1 — ■ — ■ ■ —■mJPHHP-— h i I M X. < 5 ^ — -**" «« '—■“ i 

Citie &H>£ TO SIPE VIBRAVOH FORMULA 

_ ft i ■■■ ■■ ■ i il' V. r .kj. ‘^t » ■•■ -™* • ■■ ■■«k • ■ m ~ l —i .W i —m——m ■ "wwwwwr^ — — " " 


SAi WE WANTED To HAVE 
A HEAP WOBBLE FROM 

Site to Side- 

WE MAKE A SERIES 
OF PRAWiMGD FROM 

I b s^y, 3B - 


AND INF GET 
A SIDET) SIDE 
WOBBLE BY 
HAVING 2- STRIPS 

of Action. 

2- PATTERNS 

OF ACTION 
INTEFLEAYED^ 




17 




I 7 A 

HEN 
WE 

iHrmrm 

THE/ 


THEN WE MAKE A CARTFUL 
TRACING CF#t ;W ^33 
JftSr SlNGHTLY OFFSET- 

WO WE MAKE A NEW &E&& 
OF P£AW/MSS &/ATO 33 A 

Going up Th-t-OVHER side. 


I 


I A 


7~A 


3A 


4 


4 -A 


n-«_ 


A 


ca 


~7 


7 A 


8 


8A 

eTo. 


INTERLEAVING TWO CERI& OFpmilNGS 
GIVES US ALE K/NbS OF POSSIBILITIES 
FOB VIBfCATlMG ACTION. 


299 






























HAMC& Wffl 

ih~pmy~ 



Km HAZ&I8 AMWArm A&cm& WH&KzTl ie CHABACW& MO AH * mRMQlMT" WBMIOH 

(^OiHQ UP Hi% mm fiSOM f |S TCfc$\ TO t-$S£* f j iW f//S m asm im sysrm 
IT WO&8 LIKE THIS- 


I To °t 




[warns \ 
meg# | 

\ONiW0S} 

om y 


£4/ 

-^4 AS 11 Y£J 

W WOW 
or w eA3£, 
vmmrtHQ 

AS IT 
QOBS ttP^ 



(mo OF COURSE WB CAN SB MORE }NVmiN@ WUH OVg, TAS&/N® POSITIONS »d BB&KfcMB within ■k.ACnOH 



SO, BASICALLY ifksTV&T Tvto SB&gS 0BP&WIM5& OONB CffAW&pf Wfiti 

BACH OWBK - GMHG m>P*SS fO$&f8n-tTtsS OB WOSB&S, JUDl>m / QCHVBfK **5 WATTS. 


300 























qurrE 

A m* 

FRAME 

W02 


HMI& pftvgs WHtP rUPWAtP 



snap om r&ft ov* fjwce 

PMCe tU £&mV» o/VgfiQwe 

Apreft iht s/wfi 


JRElAXgS “OH 
p£AM£ AFT&-&&&#£' 



wmACvoH 



Smb Km of thing /$ ike whip &ur wnnoor ike snap AomiT. 

Km HA&i(Z US©‘7MB mmPLB' 

A AtA/Y <S tV/A/SS /VcS £W A " 

AL-THOC&ti 

iff pm-trY 

-fie, ROf^ IM5W«> 

££fU4#> 30<WT 
0F1k<L!AM- 


Atfi> o?Ca>jflS£: 

/rip cuZmqm 

ATEAQi EWO- 







OuA COMING B^CK- 


301 
































HELPING WS OUT ON H )-?. LABT ?- MONTHS OF U CAECfc^ A/?p NTToN ANIMATED A WGNPBPFuL 

Ltm& pA.uGH rn TtNYTtM, At PiNN&P am ^acI I WEpB VmOL-WMG ike wm fvd ! rattled 
ON ABOUT HIS WORK-udii^mT UUGH HE'D Jl&T DONE. ABF§Ait> "WELL,!M AKFuUN OAD ^ 
THAT V EARS AGO KFN HARRIS SHOWED MB 7T/AT WHIP PRINCIPLE AO A PATTERN AAA LAUGH. 
il WHAT? -SHOWME t SHOWN\e!"WE STUMBLED &K-K lb Tic. STUDIO AW A&E OCRBBLFD SOMETHING 



( . O 

WATS WHAT YOU DID ON TltW AIM ? 

YEAH, YOU KNOW f %* WHIP ACTION - PIKE 1H&.Z 



APRS LAUGH (S ON "The NEXT PAGO W IM /ACLWIMS A TO BHCWJISrHOW SUBTLY 
THOSE BASIC THINGS CAN SH USED. The. SHOULDER GO UP zW POWH WITH IN ike 
LAUGH ow YOU CAN JUM ABOUT CEE ike. WHIP PATTERN HNLERLYlMW ikt ACTION, 


302 
















DIALOGUE 

IMAGINE A HANPSOME MAN TALKING To A BEAUVEJU WOMAN wj THE (2 WHAT HE &4V$: 



IT LOOKS. HIKE he’s SAy!NG*l love YOU " POTS NT it? 

NTS MOT. Hzk SAYING," ELEPHANT JUICE? 

(jWf // Y&NlOLP DAU&HTTR. BROUGHT IMS HOME FTOM & ChOOF.) 

TRY IT, !T ILLUSfJZATgi Tie- JOINT TH/T WE VoHtHAVT STANPATLETP MOUTH SHAPES 
TOT EVERY CONSONANT W VOWEL, WEfeALLPlfFfRm: OuTMOUTHS AfeALL t>!Jf^0T 

we a&fs-mm vimemny. Th&& no s er wayto fcw mivime 
vowB£-~He *aae ,jmCAmix /toss his mouth Pimfcm w/ thm ite&iGusu QimN. 

Of COURSE ALL ColZ NOtfiHS OPEN FOR %& VOWFJS A t B f l t 0( U -C A Y > ^ £/£, ON ( TOO. ^ 
ANP THEY CLOSE FORlhe. CONSONANTS ? t F, T, V. (SEE, FF, Tff mH VET ■) 

ANP TveTONGUT (£■ UR BTHINL "$eT^7f/ FoZ A i f t>, L f TH T(rmtm mtxMApm&'&TF- 

Ear 4 lot of ito Positions in real lift are am bivalent ^ inpivioual > 


304 






























HOW NOT TO DO LIP SV/VC- 


f HAD AN ENTHUSIASTIC fat GRADE TEAQHEp WITH A WIDE MOUTH 
FULL OF VERY LARGE TeEtH CeTOFF BY BRIGHT PHD LtFSXlCK- 

Evepy morning she had us au- stand up W very slowly 

HE - NUNN- SEE - AN TEH ; 

X MOO \/AH BULL HlPSSSSSS, 

MOO VAH BULL HlPSSSSSS, 

ARP THVH VEH FEE SEHSSST HIPS SS 
TOO TANK ANNNP ZSSING WiTHTHTH." 

Followed £y- 

vV OOOOP MOHRfLNN I NO Too TqOO, 

gooop moh penning Too M boo- 

\AJ0EE OHL INN OWFR ?HMYSETZ. 

WITH SSUNNSHEVENEE FAYSGE ZZ. 

OHHH, TVtSSS I ZZ THUH WAYEE 
TOO StAHRRT AHH NEEYOO PAYEE,'' 

SOMETIMES SHEO HAVE US SIT W SAY V - (Pun) FOP A MINUTE 

auu i kind of enjoyed heaping %little explosions of a/p. 
People pont talk hike this ! 

WE SMUDGE from ONE WORD SHAPE Folk*.OTHER. 

~Vtt, animators caleap it 






PHRASING 


HIKE IN MUSIC - YOU SMUDGE OVER, A FAST COMPLEX PASSAGE HITTING J1&T 1h MAIN 
THINGS — YOU PONT HAVE TO MACHINE GUN EVER/ NOTE EQUALLY-YOU SLUE OVER IT 

WHEY WE SPEAK I WE PONT APR TICK YOO HATEH EVERY LITTHE SIH AH (BULL 

FT letter top, Some People hardly move their ups when they talk .: 

The, THING IB TO THINK OF ike, WORDS, WORD SHAPES W PHPASES -NOTOF LETTERS. 
OUZ MOUTHS ARE ALL DIFFERENT. 

MOST PEOPLE HAVE ElTHEPilit TOP /g3 BOTTOM TEETH ARE 

teeth visible most of tu time- k <PT featurep most of-retime. 



305 





T'UMGSr fUN 1 \m H 4P WITH UP sy No SO FA/2 H/AJ W/TF VINCENT P&C&? VOICE- 

BECAUSE HE HN> SUCH A MOBILE PACE, MOUTH , SAINS W throat, 

fsm 7flt ■$/DF HE LOOKED AS YOfJb EXPECT, BUT WHEN HE TURNED TOTk& FRONT HB UDKeD LIKE A F/SH, 


/T 



EICHAEO 
I'M A FRWjPW 
MONST&? - 


vy , 

r.// / 1 



i i 


\\ 


Vincents mmsr told him he 

FAD A GIANT VOICE SOX- WHICH 
gave HIM that awfully pick 
tub Am CAL VOICE, 

'N& mm that 

fHS FACE WAS SO ELASTIC THAT 

me /i second cemo'ike-top 

-^mv. WOULD FEATURE, 


W 

*/ 

3f 


J 1 


t 1 



,THHt 

BOTH 



\v s 


at once. 

ALLIN ewe 
S£/vre/vce, 


AFf because he spread OUT HIS DIALOGUE 

YOU HAD lire Ft ME TO AFTfCWATE ALETL-t POPS, CRACKLES, SLOW VOWELS frd CONSOYAN 78- 
EElNF BACK IN GRADE Six'?) You COULD OVElSMimrt /r>J IT STILL LOOKED NATURAL 

Macro/ wf have to hole Down our, mouth action , unless wb'ee shouting ok Singing. 
Tab important consonants ape TRe closed mouth ones- 



IM OKUEK To READ THEBE POSITIONS WE NEED AT LEAS TWO FRAM £S . ONE ISMT ENOUGH, 

(if we don’t make these positions Tut vowel that follows will Be Vit/ateo .) 


306 







rot GOOD CRISP DIALOGUE WE SHOULD POP INTO OUR- VOW BOR - (NO INDEW.EENTj 

’ponY cushion into m Cushion back a prut ike accent fur it big, im <S often it 
urrfk* ui aloooe accent- U< *£ jA^ng Y 



TAKE ibt WOKE V '#AVS &QUI? WITH WO VOWELS - HfTlk& F/DSt VOWEL HARDEE THAN ihWl 




AC aim, IF 'SOMEONE SAYS A BROAD VOWEL LIKE NgY 1 ,"OF WQWl - 
POH'r EASE INTO Te, VOWED FROM Tie." W" WITH SEVERAL DKAW/N6C. 



=: VERY MUMMY wo SOFT 

(oFmrnw Among, amsivXAiorT 
"he/shEs ok, JtuTifSAlL I 
V A Bit sort. T / 


Pose Yc middle positions, smack right into it -mG get much more vitality. 


coMfsaess 







nC cont Fogaer 

To DISTEND Te. 
FACE - STEEfCN IT. 


A PREVALENT FAULT IN DIALOGUE IS THAT 1H ROfim OF ike. FACE POESNT SrmW aJ COAPKES NOm, 
WHICH MAKES OWL ANIMATION STIFF W STILTED. 


307 


m) To tfP&YklC ISG&rrm %e FEELING OF tfe WORD tod HOT ike INDIVIDUAL LEftE®, 

~%t IXA IS NOT To gploO ACTIVE - GETlht SHAPE OF Ait WO£J) A1AKW $0^ &£F /7T 

SEJ^er WtfAlfe IMPOitTAlif tod AVOID FLAPPIHF 1% MOtflfr A// iMATlpO EVERY lM& TPlPG, 


Actors fitting dialogue over Fc&m films hit ohm Ik accepts W gu %$ a^Ne.M\itmuim 
they match it «. first vowbl- Arifo&mproFife smrmcE ha iht- last AocwrcFii^ sentence- 
bd whats ip Setweep will WORK (oetenl to worn) 


TmK OF IT TH IS WAy : 


AKF Hie WORD ^FoZvaUE- 


f 


VoNT DO THIS - 


DO THIS' 

just use a PosmHD 
Go ft®m ope 

To %£ other. - 


! \\ ^ if 

DSTQ TAPE HFUO - 

&4M£ iWHG ' 


IHSVWN 




i 

PONT OPEN IT TWICE, 


■■: 




SOIL it DOm So Ilk SIMPLE. 






0 = DO Hr OPEN it TWO 


Go s-mimr from 

ONE To Tke. OTblER. - 



//£r *■ 




we canV m literal ip. reading ae <SCiW£> track, 

l %EMORY" /s /vcr a cm/s - /ri cw£ 


it a not- 

DPbN OfeH 

M eta OP REE 

UNI #ss THLI'RE S/HBItlG 

$ MEM - OH " REES f 

irk ''(A ETA. - RE E * 

f 

OP&m 



0 \ 


a \ 

WEVCNT 

V 

\ 

mt -■- ■ 

\ 


ANIMATE 

sr'"' u 

■- i M 

.F 

ylj 

*5 ££g 

every 

J 

/ 

S TN&LE 

A 

(NrHlS CASE 


VOWED. 


308 



'KsMfiwBeR ikt- upper, TmH are ahchotjo Tc> tk& Skuu W Co motAHiMATF zWl'm 

'COWER, JAW& ACTION iS ,VCSTP/ -WITH Tut UPQ W ToNGOC TORMlUJ Tk& SOUXiS, 





■ 


HE& T'BFTMSFNibz'fOhiGUF IN RPEfCU, Oa&TotiWES WORK RO FAST, THAT its 
JUST UP Ok JUST DOWH^ NBVeR SCBH W PDVTF (pFcrnm tr P/wses.) 



UA/CP ! 



loir th&&?a mm& - 

“fte ToHGQe wemt 
NOTH/HE-^ 
YertOFpwoF as 
Ow hou> if - f 


l. £ mc*/ 

■TO/V&t# yp C# DCW/Y OHIUN&T FBAm 


"fh e TONOOB l& ttCOKZP OH ikt* SACK oMk& LOWER JAW W /§ ADC F/OAT/M& AROUilC IN UMBO 
OR STUCK IN ike THROAT MSO THZjAyK W APBVr^gRER, CCW£/<SWT AS^tfT 7^7W. 


t 


___ scm a wmjY funny mrr smc tone these ms where this/just say, 

vV HELC y ITS A CARTOON - Cpfc HAVE IT BE A CARTOON ? AMPJHBY TF&J Tkt TEEM AS RuBBm 


3^ TOP flSCM 

7W& 0 v 




7£> * T£> r\ 

rp/s ° wis y 

v —J 




j 



j ITS VAUC \ 
/ lad OPT6A/ 

I IHLARiOUS- 
m a IQT WHAT 
\ wCreoh ABOUT 


\ H0T- 


) 




AkOfFER RULE; WE SAIL m KEEP AT LEAST J FRAM{£ TO REAL IMPORTANT CONSONANTS 

um M f B, P F, V OPT(opSth') If WSmiT, fkt VIEWER WONf SEE IT, 


it m -tit zoom 

REARING WSQtip/ 
HAVE ONE FRAME 
m PICATBP FC& 
AH ] M /y SOUHp - 


- rrs mot morn. 



PQ WE ST&P 
IT FROM the 

precetcmg 

S>0(jNt> , 

jive tr moth&& r- 
EXTRA FRAME 
IN PRON TOF if 
TO R&SISTEE' 

- m/FR AFTfiR— 

1 1 P-‘ 



... because 
weneep 

To Hlfitt'o 

INCOMING 
A y u VOWEL 

one NOSR, 


309 







ft* 




‘C 


PICTURE? W SOOAp OY/YO 


i *—- ir m*m* wm 


THIS BRINGS US 70 TUo THoRMY PROBLEM OF' Vo WEANIMATE LEVELSVMC OP AMM/mik& 

Pimm om mm Amo 0FTt<c sound Mcmwrm o&iwo fram& ahead of tut. com, ce what? 


ANSWER.* WORK LEVEL- 


(m) \ F WePf OH TWOS - 

- W it work S oiT7Wrvwy- 

GflF F8W(£ AHEAD. 


’.GZ 

*rs<5&& 

L L 


& 

.-fa*»" . 

£«**■ p**' 

3 

1 

*h 

/ j 

6 

1 Am 

6 

fV\ 

7 

X 1 

g 

y 

...9 " 


to 



/ 

>■■* ■•» jr. I * ■ jif 

L(V L-a=k* 


Lyi*" irfM 

3 

/ 


/ 

5 

A A 


/ V\ 

7 

\ A ' | 


y 

9 

/ 



A^PYroWCtW ]>&AWlhlG& % 3 m 27 

RIGHT OH Ike, l M' SOUND. 


fUram'-M' praw/hg 

om FRAME AHEAD CFlkWM' SOUND 

f uid V 'pruning / mm \ 

[ a heap of lift y f sound ekj 


THERE pa C&JPE POPE OF THUMP THAT IT POORS BETTER WtWTtes PICTURE LEADING Tie, SOUND 

sy z frames, because of this, a disease sprang- up where some edhdfs setup 

-fat TYRANNY THAT ANIMATORS MUST ANIMATE EVERYTHING 2 FRAMES AHEAD OFikuSOUND 
50 THEY COULD JEST PlOF IN Jit,RESULTGo ROME- 


W PONG. THERE ISNTJUST ONE RULE. SOMETIMES FEVER SYNC WOPR& B>EST- SOMETIMES ITS 

better with ih picture one frame advanced, often iris better z frames aheap (hence 

Ik t DISEA&e) ^ &OMEVMES ffS BETTER WlftHke PI&V& EVEN S FRAMES AHEAD OF %<l SOUND 


If You always answer, 

*llk 2 FEMES AHEAD* 

You get a crazy chwhon 
where youre thinking sideways 


udncdusion- 



4—' PAAWHG 
4t~ wwge'W'wMiVG- 
^ W pmtm 

^W'p/ZAwm 

aQ (U- ToTTC* 


WHY? 


There is cnePealsyNc ^thatis level. Right cxife ,mcdulatkn is iqo% ferttct, logically. 

irjMSf DEPENDS WHAT LOOTS BEST WHEN WE Play WITH IT. SO WE&tfVSE RIGHT ON IZklNOSS- 
OR ONE FRAME AHEAD - IF ITS CONVENIENT— NEVER LATE, 


THEN WE CAU RON OUF >ESTS AT LEV#, SYNC, TNEN ADVANCE Th% POVRE CHE OR TwO ORTH REE 
FRAMES — DEPENDING ON WHAT Loot®. RIGHT TO US. WE LEARN THINGS THIS WAY. 

IT ALL DEPENDS ON The, CHARACTER W TV PE OF VOICE W NOW WE 1 YE DONE ikt*Jb8. 


310 


























































Q Act&m) 

-lift OLP MASTHE& PUT SHARP PHYSICAL ACTIONS. W HEAP MO/ES 3 0 *i 4 F&M&S AHEAD 

OF Ike POPULATION — THEN PET ike MOUTH ACTION ON Th&NOSE - (w A mtm ersmm) 


IF-ON 

ONES- 




( 


>■ \ 

\:..,r^ W: 

2> 



"i. 

Ma&ACCCr/T X 


4 

ATmmAHEAP 


s 



6 

sc mJN£> AOcwr x 

\ .. j 

.7 


LZ...1 . 



1 Stu 

4 



/o 



// 


IFON 

TWOS- 



- A 

j / 


l jP P JA O] 


HEAP 43C6W X 

.rf 1 " v' j-' 

jiT 

'' "3. 

4 «SAKK MSAi> 




A/ 

.1. 


/ y 


SCWND ACCSMT X 

- 

7 


T) 



V. jTUj 

H9 


Vy . 




If 


THEY GeruP TffeEE (orpohhtm*) fofcifo/gc&rr 3 ae 4 &.£L/~thsN H«l im/W op0s.cn Pl SnuN£>. 


s- 


put&mplv - / 




Accevr fcpoPw 

X ON MOPMATOH 


TTs, D&tCEGtv& 
A E&MtFUL 
Result. 

Mimmr&z, 
rm Htrrnts fjf 

AU- ATOfC$ 


MOST OF ikeTIME Ifa, HEAP ACCENT /S UP. 

0 ANTICIPATE POWN 
(g> THEN Tffro ACCENT UP 

(J> THEN LIPS ON ike- VOWEL £ lt& W&AMXY A VOWEL 7 WT We'«? HlrffNGJ 
We CAN PO IT IN Bur MOSTLY ITS StPONOER GOING UP(PUT Pom /S F(KE, loo.) 

Anyway, there & always an accent—unless nh an utter# Boring person cpmm. 


TAKF; u W£LL; AT LAST YfflkB HO/ASl **3 Accews 

if 7T 

vows- vows. yews. 


hit only Tu.t voweis which are iMt&mtn Gloss oYEdifo owed s, 
we hit certain accents when speaking We Slur, ovh? 7a* pgr. 

@> *W£LL t AT LAST, youfee HOME! * 

T 

gfG-ACmif 

® v weUy at ,usr 'Yourn hqmb!* 

swu Te<$ 

Ace&rr Mimr 

Just Fir ike. main accents , select whai& important- wHeinte its a soft or HARP A scent. 

Hm AQCENT: fijQl Go POWN (pEUif) W YOU BOUNCE SACK. 

Soft Accent-. ^f^OO00&L, &D POWN (orup) W CONTINUE. 


311 












































AN EXAMPLE of BODY action PP&POM INATfMB: 

Tfipk SAYING * ILL SUP INTO SqMThINS COOLER." 

ACC0T 

SrE dcss it with m~&HouLP&Z‘ 

rk UP AS &H& TURNS TOWAPP ttS f ANTICIPATES down 
3 ') G0& UP FAST mtr%<L MAIN ACE^Wf OH COOUTi. 

ALSO AT ITxSAMTTmT HEP- HEAP ACCENTgoes VaM 
OH fhttd- THE ONLYmm ACCENT ALSO OHTA'oqt 
i HOULbTpL up, HEAD lOWN, MOUTH EXA&G&WEb — 

ALU To HIT Ikn ONLY ACCENT IN Ike TzNTmcT, 

~tt Am1kimumpm&‘ k&fXD (|j) vm-Vit^mY- 



T- S CCRRS FINE, BUT WOULD LAVE SEEN £VEV SETTER IETcMEAD DtJ 
-C...UER ACCENT fiAL COME3atAffN\£§ M&P of'TtodTomLATON, 


ACTION 

DIAL 


© TURNS \ 

& 

y 

- \ 

X 


\ 

L 4 

a 

\ 



- —r ™ 

f 


£ 


£ 


ANTIC. pai/Af X 


7 


f . 



E« - 



rr 




Li 


r\ . . 


urn up x 

r 

IS 






is 


. hi.. 


/ 

:■' 

n 


~J 



1 ZUJ _ 

Tt- 


Pff 


j sunULncfA 

o 

7/ 

SfX£ DDiM 

Vi 


\ ’In ANTIC-. 



\ Acc&tr 

/ l 


\ x 

ul 

. agy 

\ 

;( / 1 


\ 

/VI 

77 


_ - - '--- ~ - •.■'■■■ ■ ,:-’-r 

^ri i 


\ ! 

1 H 


\ 



\ ;]| 

jti/* 





& HeA^Gomvam 


ss 

/ snoiitp&z " 



/ OCRS up 

C-*-* 

as: 

1 



T AGcmr x 


3TL 


>* 



fj 

g? 



r 






H&P ] SHcuiMl 

l 

42 

Oom / pomh 



UP 1 

ITO If : 

4*-? 

/ 



/ 


4-7 

/ 

/< 


5 / 


. 4-7 

-=-rr 

i 

V ^ 



Jh 

5/ 


1 ■" 1 - '■ ■ —■■:+. 



- 

5S 






SSI 






A 






CtfTj 



N— 


312 






































































































































































313 











































r 




ATTITUDE 



MAKE POINT OF Li* & SHop clear Wim BODY ACTION first, JhcSOP Y ATTimbB S HouLO 

FCHO TV FACIAL ATTITUDE. lit ALL ONE. Pie, EXPRESSION Or The, BODY tot) FACE /S 
MORE IMPORTANT WAN Thz MOVEMENT 

IF WE GET ike. BODY %) HEAP IN pie, RIGHT ATTITUDE WE CAM ALMOST GO WtTbOCTJh& MO/IHS, 

TH mouth ACTION can Go ON VST - THE/ CAN BE Khz PACT THlNGTo WORK ON, 

Ken HARRIS CAP HE LEADED Tfe MOTT ABOUT UP CINC WHEN HE HAD To AM AWE A MADE AN CHARACTER 
WHO HAP NO MOUTH. TlUS MEANT HE HAP TO GET The HEAD ACCENTS RmT To MAKE IT CON VIM CIN0. 

In pUNNiNe WE SHOULD MAKE SURE WE VCNT HAVE TOO MUCH GOING ON . HOW MANY RX^ fDR 
THIS SENTENCE- ftPTW^ THOUGHT ? Act (TOUT BOip If DOWN SO /70 SI0LE^ K&T> itQmKE. 

We Cam only Put over one thing at atime. Justas we cmonly say one wctd at a TiME j we 

CAN ONLY PROJECT ONE GESTURE AT A TIKE. The WHOLE RXE SHOULD KM TCMRD THAT ONE THING. 



ONE EVENING INitte- EARLY 70S / IMS TALKING ToMILTKAHL ABOUT TUc SUPERB MOUTH' 
SHAPES HE ALWAYS GOT IN HlS ANIMATION. HE RAID/" WATCH SINGERS TOR MOUTH SHAPES " 

i Asked, 1 )g there any tamp secret to pi p Sync ? 7/ 

He pit up. u You want-Pz secret? iUtelpyoh The. secre t! You Know that Jim Henson 

WITH H<0 FROG MUPPET? WEIL,HES A GENIUS 1 . HE UNDERSTANDS SOMETHING THAT PUPPEfFEPS 

H ever pit> Before, He Re He's just got a bock over ho hand Though HE Can Never, 

WATCH 7k SOUHP EXACTLY, HE DOES A FAR BETTER JOB THAN MOST OF US ANIMATORS WITH ALL 

ou.kTechnical resourced. You watch what he ! s doing! hes progressing tuc action. 

I i i ■■ ■ m r rr- Y’'"r ~i11 ii 'i 1 1 r "t r ~' T~f 1 T" 1 1 

nES GOING SOMEWHERE WITH THAT FROG WHEN HE'S TALKING. 

.■^■***i*M Bill_H_ n * 

V / LEARNED 1 HlS BACK Ctf'somCFiUeSQm ' WHEN I HADJI ie FOX SAYING TO Th TABS IT / 

" ’ A1 GOING TA ROAST YUH, ETC, FTC. I HARDLY MOVED the, MOUTH AT ALL, HE TO Sp&KlNQ 
THROUGH HIS TEETH WHEN HE PUSHED FORWAPP TOWARDS iftt PABBlT. HE fROGmEEP Jo WAHLS 
Tie BABBIT! I PROGRESSpp If AS HE SPOKE a*) THAYsUc SECRET GO SOMEWHERE, 

anywhere, as Yen speak ." 

WHEN l GOT SICK TO ENGLAND I KJJSPD in To KEN HARRIS JUMPED UP ^ DOWN, 
vV IVE GOT 1Tie, SECRET 1 . TV SECRET OF LIPS YNC! MI IT KAHP TOLD ME Tie. SECRET l 9 


Pen looked up QuizzicaicY' 

" fu,e secret! " / Burbled / Vl the secret /s io progress ihc Action as you cpm-i /x 
Kens ever rolled he Am ward. u what do you think i ve been trying to telpya ? 7/ 

WELL, The, PENNY PROPPED CfwauY) AMD l NEVER, LOOKED BACK. THATS IT. 


314 




ACTING 

IN itue, IPPok COME&DPV ATKeP LOUIS ARMTROM&, V&T /$* $WMS?" LOUIS jWSWs^).. 
%M, ff YOU HAVE TO ASK, You'Ll- NEVER KNOW. " 

Bur we all mow about acting! We vo it alp mf- weke acting viffbpfnt parts 
A ruikt time. There ace several of us in Herb, 

PO You ACf The <TAM£ WAV WITH YOUR, Wife/HU& gANbf, LOVER AS WHEN A TRAFFIC Cop 
PULLS YOU OVFR? Oft WTHT&. SANK MANAG&tP ok WITH YCUIZ CHILDREN? WITH 
YouCBORR ? WITH Co-WORKERS ? FRIEND? WITH YoUR SUBORDINATES ? /OUR ENeMiB S? 

WERE ACTING ROLES ALL 1Ue,VMB, DEPENDANT ON tfe£nWKW We'rb IN &*) WbKNOHIT- 

WR TROT OUT H\e PERSONALITY APPROPRIATE To WHAT'S REQUIRED IN OUR SfTUAT&t. 

Theses ■ 1 U Authoritarian 

TY)& OH HD 

The STUDENT 

Tk% RESPONSIBLE ADULT 

The LOVER 

The. PR-IEND 

The CLOWN 

The. mpATRenc i kindly Person 

The PUNTER 

The POWER- CRAZY MANIAC etc. 

Tk e. thing is to Bb a waPe of it *«J use it to express things-to dev flop 
T he ability to PROJECT it through our drawings or invented images sy 

GETTING INTO %l CHARACTER WE 'RE DEPICTING f IN It ie SITUATION THEY'RE IN, 
KNOWING WHAT IT IS THEY WANT - WHY THEY t WANT If — THATS ACTING, 


315 



































































WE WANT TO PUT SOMETH iNG OVER CLEARLY THROUGH A PARTICULAR GtARA&£&~ 

Clear pepioioks of WHATk go mo on with Ike character,' 

DO ONE THING AT A TIME s hG Be CR/Dtal CLEAR, 

if i me Start \with that, then m can deepen Cue Performance as much 

AT WE ARE CAPABLE OF. 

Wp CERTAINLY ALL KNOW ike. BASEL EMOTIONS- 

AND WE ALL KNOW ABOUT FEAR 

CREEP 

HUNGER 

COLD 

LUST 

VANITY 

LOVE 

9«J The, need To Sleep. 

Knowing there, its .just about how different people handle them. 

So irk just A Question of widening our range to accommodate more 
roles - which we po natuhaul/ by observation W experience - 

(ANlK) HAVING 'tJ DEVELOPING ike. ABILITY To PROJECT IT INTO ike CHARACTER 
- WE 1 RE WORKING ON. 

MILT KAHL ALWAYS SAID,*! THINK YOU .JUST PO IT. IF YOU HAVE A PROBLEM 
YOU HAVE TO PUT If OVER. GOT TO HAVE A THOROUGH UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT 

you Re after . And if you know what you're after - you turtkeep after 

IT TILL You GET IT " 

Am , vV GIVE If A LOT OF THOUGHT HOW YOU'RE GOING TO DO Tim BEST JOB OF 

putting ike performance oNiUe Screen - Putting over what you have 
to put over/ / 

Got to Get INSIDE ike CHARACTER, what DOES HE I SHE I IT WANT? 

AND EVEN MORE INTERESTING - WHY DOES The CHARACTER WANT? 

WHAT AM I DOING W VVHY AM / pOlNG IT? 

TU People who really know how to act all sax " you port act, 

YOU BECOME K f 

Th&. movie star, Gene Hackman said something like / / work like mad 
at /never bring caught acting, ,y 

Good a crocs do a lot of r^eapch so ike. Reality They're Depicting 

becomes their reality. 


316 



~Jl}& fine Charactetl actor f Ned BEATTY said. ' \20Vi£; ACrOt ss HYPNCTl^E 

THEMSELVES INTO BECOMING1U PART- BUT A VERY SMALLGROUP OFACTO £$ 

A C1UALLY HYPNOTISE ike AUDIENCE - 

So iL^IDEA fS TO HVPNOTSE The AUDIENCE, 

FRANK THOMAS U&ESikt WORD ' CAPTIVATE! *YOURF TRYING TO GRAB %a 
AUDIENCES ATTENTION W HOED /n- HOED IT WITH SOMETHING REAL THAT 
THEY CAN IDENTIFY WITH/' 

Conclusion- , ... 

WE TRV TO MAKE T SO REAL / SUPER- PEAL, THAT ITS COMPULSIVE 
VIEWING. WB EXPERIENCE il te- EMOTION MAGNIFY iH RESULT- 

i vs Always Been embarrassed by animators hanging around Ike water 

COOLER. TALKING- ABOUT/HE ACTING" 

ITS WELL KNOWN THAT A LOT OF ACT(STS CAN TALK A TERRIFIC FIGHT, 
BUT WHEN YOU SEE 7HFIRL DRAWINGS, ifc A FLAP GIVEAWAY OF WHAT 

they're Really like, am p> how much more so when their drawing s 
are actually moving AROUND. You CAN see a person's strengths 
T id WEAKNESS^ right away. 

If m ( !ZE A COLD FISH, SUPERFICIAL PERSON OR EMOTIONAL WRECK,THERE 
IT IS FDR ALL TO SEE, S O WE CAN OMLY EXPRESS OURSELVES AS BEST WE 
CAN WITH WHAT WE HAVE TO OFFER EMOTIONALLY DuJ TECHNICALLY. 

(m~) A REALLY GOOD PROFESSIONAL SHOULD BE ABLE TO HANDLE A 

WIPE RANGE OF ACTING MATERIAL, WHATEVER. HIS/HER EMCTiOUAL 
STATE OF MIND- 

THeReS THIS <2 TORY ABOUT A SERIOUSLY DEPRESSED MAN IN GERMANY 
WHO WENT TO SEE A PSYCHIATRIST; 

The PSYCHIATRIST says, you VE LOST YOUp SENSE of HmoUR IN LIFE 
You NEED TO HAVE A REALLY GOOD LAU&H. GO T6 tUe CIRCUS - THEP/( 
TH IS GREAT CLOWN, GROCK, Tk o FUNNIEST MAN Yo/VE EVER SEm/ 
Ike, ANSWER COMES BACK , * / AM GROCK, " 

Frank Thomas , a master of animating empathy ^ pathos , aaa/avs 

CRITICISED ME (construct 1VLLY) FOR SPENDING TOO MUCH TIME ON 
SPECTACULAR SURROUNDING ANIMATION W NOT ENOUGH OFGOWE 
STRAIGHT FOR 1k& EMOTIONAL CENTRE. 

PART OF pita, REASON WAS TffAT l FELT WE WEREN F YET GOOD ENOUGH AT T 
Go WORK ON five . l ' WORLP // OF Tk-t, PIECE %<a 3 LEAVE Tka, HAMLET ^7 TIFF 

T ILL LAST 'BUT FRANKS oRITlCSM IS VALID, 


317 



Animation was pm of w p olprums when we started maxim a 1 who framed 

CODER BABBIT' FRANK WROTE MBA WONDERFULLY ENCOURAGING BETTER 

including, u if You brihq this off, you'll be a hero. " 

i CARRIED FRANKS LETV&Z IN MY CHEST POCKET THROUGHOUT IUb % i/ L YEARS 

OF PRODUCTION PRESSum Me) WOULD EeREAD IT every time things got ROUGH. 

WHEN Tk& PICTURE CAME OUT Rub WAS A HIT, NOTHING FROM FRANK. 

2 - MONTHS LATER Cfkttie BIGGEST PICTURE of TkeVEAft, NOTHING FROM FRANK 
3 MONTHS LATER I RANG NfM UR 


ti 


Ft FRANK, ITS PICK 


// 


V- ' w 

,,, Y FAH,,, 


X HU, FRANK, WELL, WE MALE c! Irk A HIT, FRANK! ITS A Fir! 
EAH..T 

NV / mlan / well, we pip ia&best we could its a huge 
success! enormous!" 

'"well, I KNOW ; FRANK, IT COULD HAVE BEEN BETTER, BUT WE 
REALLY WORKED HARD W 0VFEYBOPY LOVES IT/ * 

^ r , , YEAH - ' 7 

" x Kell , er ,um, / guess that you could say that we raised 

A GIMMICK TO Tli^ LEVEL OF A NOVELTY, BUT UK A HIT! " 
*„.Y EAH* 


// 


^Aw f cme on frank, / know you always criticise me for 
Mot grabbing Tue, audience emotionally - rut Youve got 

To GIVE IT TO ME , WHEN T& VILLA^S GOING TO KlLLTHE 
RABBIT BY DIPPING HIM iNTke VAT OF ACETONE, ALLTheRIDS 
IN AUDIENCE YELL /'PONT DO if! PONT DO ITf 7/ 

(long pause) ,)\i wish they had. * 


WELL, I KKON WHAT FRANK MEANS. IN MY DEFENSE, I HAP To PUSH VERY CtZONGLY 

for Some animation i did at front of ike opening cartoon where 

WE COULD AT LEAST SpE WHATT& RABBIT LOOKED LIKE BEFORE HEQtARTeD 
S LOOT NG AROUND DIKE A CRC&S BETWEEN CHEWING &0M sJ A FIREWORK- 

THERE WAS A REAL OPPORTUNITY FOR, PATHOS THAT WE MISSED. 

THERE IVAS A SHOT of ROGER SITTING ON A GARBAGE CAN IN A B/CK ALLEY 
CRYING ABOUT WHAT HE THOUGHT WAT HIS WIfTc INFIDELITY- 


318 



LIKE GfROCK, i WANTED TO SHOW A COMPLETED DIFFERENT SIDE OF The, 
RABgirk PERSONALITY BEHIND MS PROFESSIONAL MASK* I VVAHTpD la ANIMATE 
IT MYSELF, gift I HAD Too MUCH ELSE TO DQ. WE HAP A FINE LEAP AN/MAJOR 
WHO WAS AT The-TIME VETO/ LONELY W / Kmw HE WAS MAH fo£1ke>fQ&> 

A TOR EXECUTIVE CO/YES IN xJ SAYS *BY To WAY, PICK, SO frdSo EEAU-Y WATS 
TO DO THAT SCENE, l SA(P / "OH HO r HES A SUPERB BROAP ANIMATOR. W 
INVENTIVELY FUNNY, EXCELLENT, BUT I THINK NFS WRONG FdFTHF SCENE, 

H-E& COT A GREAT GIRLFRIEND, HE? VERY Up w)UOTThe PERSON. KTtTHlSJog* 

* BUT he Realty wants to do it, pick, He f s been phoning mb up about it* 
''Bur HRs wrong - it’ll be ok- But it wont have this other side to it 
%e other Guy should do it ^ '’but heK $ tying to do it 

I lose argument. Outvoted, its wrong, buttu picture feeds 

LIKE A HIT W ANYWAY I CANT AFFORD TO BE FIRED. OF QOOASETkt, 

result was just like all Tk^ Other, manic scenes - W.we m / ss eo 

HAVING ANOTHER DIMENSION To Tie. CHARACTER WHICH WOULD HAVE GIVEN 
A MUCH STRONGER EMOTIONAL PULL WITH Tkc AU.DfENCE, 

WIN SOME/ LOSE SOME, 

(N AN INTERVIEW IN iHlZ AT Tit ZAGREB FILM FESTIVAL, FRANK THOfUS 
TALKED ABOUT A MAN xv WHO NEVER HAD TALENT for entertainment, H E 
WAS ONE OF Tie- BEST ASSISTANTS WE EVER HAD >, PE KNEW EVERYTHING 
YOU COULD TEACH ABOUT MOVEMENT, MOVING Tke CHARACTER w WEIGHT 
'SiO PERTH BALANCE m3 ALL THESE THINGS . HE COULP DEM THEM LIKE 
ANYTHING, BUT HE HAD A VERY WEAK SENSE OF ENTERTAINMENT W HE HAP 
A VERY POOR CHOICE OF WHAT TO PO IN ANIMATION — SO A/S ANIMATION 
K/AS ALWAYS FLAT IT ALWAYS MOVED NICELY, BUT NOBODY WAITED To LOOK ATi T * 

MILT KAHL ALWAYS SAID, "fl4 A MATTER OF TICKING %*. RIGHT THING r O DO 
2nd MAKING UP YOUR MIND ABOUT THAT . AND THEN NOT IfTriNG ANY OTHER 
IDEAS INTERFERE WITH IT . POA/T" LET YOUR MAIN IDEA GET BUFJED OR 
INTERFERED WffH BY SOMETH IMG ELSE, /y 

CONCLUSION^ 

WE THINK ABOUT IT iN OVERALL, JUST AS IF INF WERE AN ACTOR DOm IT 
HOW DO WE DO IT ike, BEST WAY To Pur Tke &U&INESS OVER Tee BEST? 

Before we a a/ /mate we figuee our in advance exactly what wb‘pe com To vc 

Know where weft going, in Planning lock down Tk& >mRdptant fcdes. 


319 



A&T BABmrr SAID THAT ike* GREAT S/W^TYTtA (jz&NOWN&D FCPoThcEi^oTOHAL 
POW&& oJ HEARTFELT PASSION INHIS WO&K) SPENT PAYS WORKING OH T/NY 
THumHAliX. HE HAP EVERYTHING ALL WORKED OUT fH MINIATURE g BFORZ 
AH /MATING, pANp Tke* 0*f£> PESULT Trill. CAMBOUf JuST AS QWCHPf AS OTA0Z ANIMATORS) 

Gpiki natnickalso told me, ' 1 tytla was a very t vbpy carbful planner?- 


CcpANGB OF }BYPRESS ION ") 




/ WAS VERY TAKEN WITH WHATDISNEY AANTTBR AN/MATOrJ fBACJiBP BPKlLA&SON 
HAS TO SAY IM FRANK THOMAS W OLLlB JOHNOTOHS THE ILLUSION OF LIFT A 
tf££A(!> Iti 7h* EARLYMICKEYMOUSE SHOOS THEY DiSCOVERED THIS PRINCIPLE* 
IF YOU WERE LOOKING AT A PORTRAIT AN>- 

* THE SUBJECT GRADUALLY LOWBRED fHS BROWS INTO A FROWN - 
PAUSED * AND THEN LIFTED ONE BROW AND GLANCED TO IMP SIDE, 

YOU IMMEDIATELY WOULD SpHSE A CHANGE FROM ONE THOUGHT 
TV ANOTHER. SO/11 zTH lNO VERY /Af PORTANT HA PPpNBD l 

THROUGH A CHANGE OF EXPRESSION The THOUGHT PROCESS WAS SHOWN." -■ 


i THOUGHT OK, LETS JUST SKETCH THIS OUT IN US SIMPLEST POLM tod SEE WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE - 



A/VMA 



ti 


AJAAA 

<Tf2APttAUL t-OWfiffi 
SEOWS INTO A PtiOWH 



/\yv\y\ 


PAUSES -rwew 
Lim ONE BROW 



AND <Ri-AMCg$ 

tothesipeP 


(Great. Hes twnkwgI then i wondered- is there any way to $t&n&mn ws further? 





OK, i-Eft have Tac Prep,zcws. 

60 yf> iN AN ANTICIPATION E&FOfe GOING DOWN. 


320 



Tpr WORKS. CAN WE SV^GTHeH IVFUtZtHEfc Gtill? 

WHY PONT WE AHTiCifATeik, EAiCEP EYEBROW BY LOWERING IT WITHER? 





AAAa. 

Geo pom itgqmup 




THAT WORKS 7£>0. ANYTHING gl£E WE CAN DO ? 



AAAA 


MAA 


AAAA. 


/VWV 


Aaaa 


ama 


A/VX/V 


^ S'AOW Hi-'A/K ENROUTE 

, MI&HT HBLF ir~ 

MAYBE WEVE OVEZAN MATED IT BY NOW ^ MAYBE fit A BsT CORNY ’SuTirsHO^ 
WHAT WE CAN to BY LOOKING TOR EXTRA POSITIONS - MORE CHANGE -MORE BANG 

FCfACUju SUCK. 


C 


L-COK FO&TkR CONTRACT 


MILT KAHL ALWAYS SAI£> PONT CHANGE tte EXPRESSION WRING A EBDAD MOT. 
HE ( 0 yS£7W$ EXAMPLE : 

SAy WE HAVE A PERSON R^AtPlNG A BOOK" 



HE HEARS A NOISE 

which startles him 
- PRi&fmlS him- 

swmsRouNb. 



321 

























Fo&A START wdo n EEP SOMETHING TO CHANGE FROM - SOMETHING OPfDCfTE- 

sornrum thatc a lot different from what we ( rm. going to change to, 

Lpfe FFT~fa*-gOOK UP xJ> 



Sur wo Pair want 10 change Hts expre&on wrjns ike. move where we cMr see rr 

GO WE INSERT a POSITION WHERE WE Cm ih& CHANGE BEFORE 'flu MOVE. 



OR) HAVE HIM WOVE CHANGE jUe, EKPR&&ON Write END cf HP MOVE WHERE WE CAW If. 





Either wav 

/s MUCH 

more 

effective 


Tlfc. IDEA IP TO Put IUsl GRANGE WHERE YOU CAN SEE IT ~ NOT DuBlN<S ite. BROAD MOVE - 
CNEES £ Ifo MOVE IS QUITE SHOW - THEN WE COULD REAP IT 

Again f/ 1kc mind is ike, pilot ; we thine or things sendee i% e Bopy mrs them, 
there s always a cpittsecond of "thinking time" Before character pos Inaction. 


322 




ChU ACnm point 

....a.^u' 


A SAP ACTOlT Witt- POINT 
At Tt SAME Tl^E AS TATIM& 


HE sees . 1 


-rm& 

£k'tfS&tAE 


BUT m GAN TAKE IT OUT OF 
ikifcmM OFlfcCUOtE 
EUAPPf 8Y POINTING Fl&l 
aW THEM SAYWG (Ti 



OR, SAX It Fim THEM POINT - 


iHaOEKJMV/, WITH POINTING - 
l/t A GOOD i PEA TO HEAP 
WITH 1U t WZIQ r- 

>ic) have fa* han i> Finger. s 

CoM£ up HMT. 


AMO - A Y^Ry M/NOR 7 * Afc 

m a FPsrMovmmr- 

IE WERE Goim FEOm(A) 1 


Mao/ 

SETT#?' 



THAN 

WCRPS 









K/^ QptAp /WS^T I FRAME 
&TDRF (IT) IN 1 ti^WRDH<E 
pimrck: Tc&FAsrib&eE 
Ear we Fmn iht s map/ 



323 





































































^ — 


ROPY LANGUAGE 




The brilliant vmm m pilectdr/designs ken ahderson sad, 

a PANTOMIME IS %g BASIC APT OF ANIMATION . 

Body language ts To foot W fortunately it is universal. 


u 


/ WAS WITH Km IN TEHRAN JUST BEfOREihc-RmOLUTicN&J / HAP A NASTY SHOCK ^ A BiCLE^CN 

wren -mm fan my & HajtFL-os.cKR.--vYmm M ohrstmal emu' fob ah imiAN ampibce. 

We hap Tripp to have as much bow language ih ite pilm as we Could but m Still wsR£ 
left wm PicK&to literate stop/, of course ike. audience pidht mw&tanl a word. 
a chuck Jones captccN emu oh after ■W Blew us our or ta water. 

BO FOR US, W& SHOULD KEEP WORDS To A SAPP MINIMUM W MAKE 0mWm AS CLEAR 
AS WE CAN VH3DUQ H PANTOM. IMF WSHOULD FUEL WE HAVE ONLY TUl WWlbTHLfo PTORY 

irk A TREAT TEA To STUDY SILENT MOVIES , ALTHOUGH MUCH OF 1&L ACTING IE IMGHAEUf 
HAMMY W CORNY- Ift ALU WRY CLEAR- ALMOST A LOST ART, 

AN ACTOR-HAS TO BE SPONTANEOUS TO A DEGREE - BUT ITS NOTSRCWTAmOtiS TORUS'/TS 
ANYTHING M£' WECANTlf ROWN W c GIVE IT A LOT CF THOUGHT- WE CAH 70 THINGS, 

TEST THEN[ W MAKE CHANGES, WEVE <3 OTphe, BODY CONTROL W WgRENOT PM TFT BY 
PHYSICAL VEKTERtTY, OR GRAVITY, C&A&E, OR RAPE, OR SEX. AGAIN, WE CAN iNYBtT WHAT 

wt£NT exist' in reality w still make it a ppeaf- beuevasle. 

^ ' II — III ~ l~-'- I . . 

( symmetry ask twthing j 


/ FEEL THAT SYMMETRY HAS GOTTEN A BAP PRESS BECAUSE OF BAD ANIMATION ACTING. 
PEOPLE SAY ‘'AVOID TWINNINGWHERE BOTH ARMS %} HANDS ARE VO(NG Tko SAME THING. 



3'JX Ji1ST WATM AN V POL I ffCM, P&AOHER OR LEADER OF WHATEVER t OR EXPERT ON THm&CN, 
WHEN THEY'RE LAYING pOWNiks-lAW THE FARMS 'mi HAND § WILL 7WW SYMMETRICALLY. 



* WE N&D PA LAUGH-, " HAFP/NESS AMD ITS Up TO YOJ SO THAT I CAN OU CCLSO 

HARMONY, ABUNDANCE. F 'ORAL- TO VOTE FOP-MB D^UVBR, £NUGHT&Mm' 

OR- TD ^SWD MOrV^ (EUOROUS KARMCHY 

mcspmnY 
ASmmcE 
Eahanc&d lvTs eh. 


324 



Tm may oo rr/N a m>oc&> t /&s&on *- 



GLOizteus, 

W£ “ 


ahp watch )tw&&F mm Yovm tmm mmiu. ym about someth . m jusr m trmum*. 

t mm mmzmy is ah mptmoH of wmaw smm, mum= i ogm U 4 mom ^ P&cm 

use itALLTli^VMS (&fzmme irupTommr m wmw&t) W thfn feti$N to irioEXF&&& 
%t whole mss Tm'fcz mv mg to cohvbv, 7 

<o t a jupiaouz use of twinning m fff&tnb because irk mcuuTom 

with How we use it. 


A WAY To TAKE Hit GFFTWMHiti % 16 JUSTTO PE AY ONEOFikz, HMDS OR ARMS BY <&&&&& 



Like A dancer worn) oo - on rim wortm pmm 





m k MA&/&WHC Tv MABrmUASS ON ACTING, MiCMAEL CAINE CmCMP 0ZR/QHE BY SA0. 

IF you see some aopz mm a Piece of ductus tmr You admire- smu it * 

(pirn foz. wmr) ''£ 2 MS (I ♦ * (a«w*w=p smock, mmou .) v becmcf ,., TH& D/D. * 



Sound mice cme f&xa t»e Dmw ®wo tm-Y on- 

if You'm SNc&r of vm, cp&> rroNTk* eves. me eves ape wmc people watch. 

OF COOM&E THE IS JtOE. The EYES Ape Tut VIS mb FARTOFik, BPA/N - OlW CDHNETW ID ft 



I THINK THATS WHY WE SEE Tie 'SOUL ' OP PERSON FEVEAL0P M Tke EYES > (T& SCAfcY, H 

Lemma &&i arum* 


325 

















Our ryes art supremely expressive u.J we easily common catewith 

Y£S ALONE . WE CAN OFTEN TFLLTkr KtORY JUST WITH 1H EVES, 


AND HOW MUCH MORE DRAMATIC IT IS TO JUST TURNIke&N& INSTEAD 
OF ike. WHOLE BODY! 


Herb's something we see all pay every w-W O not seen it 
animated until i started rant no about it to animators s years a go,- 





mm 


WHEN LISTENING ONTk& PHONE Hk-t- EVES FLICKER 
AROUHD IN A STAQZATO FASHION REFLECTING 7&e 
LISTENERS SHiFt!NO THCU0H TS IN REACTION- 
OUR BYES ARE RARELY S' VEL¬ 





ITE eoop to distend me. pupil to s how form - feel factorIu eve. 





movs. PuFi- down with Bt> >s ,'p m H&wi- Foeam irpown. 


'There i s an infinite variety of Bp nits. But herbs a simple formula . 


I 2 3 H' €67 



'THIS IS CRUDE, But EFFECTIVE - WORKS WELL ON ONES OR TWOS. 


WE Cm FTP ON FOREVER aeout acting (pj we do) but our,job is 

© Pur over. point cf-p c scene Clearly 

© Get INSIDE lie. character, or characters ■ 

C?uY EVEE/SOEYS PEAU-Y PTF&ZEhTj 

(D SNOW clearly what they 'no THINKING. 






:*r:- ‘ 


ANIMAL ACTION 

fbifa legged animals walk like two of us joined together - one CLiomiy ahead 

OF The- OTHER " TWO CRTS. OF HESS &FIGHTUV OUT OF PHASE. 

we hook equals itt&SJW rums 4 $ we po with a human, start wtttilhz contact 

POSITIONS fPEOBABL Y STARTING oh ik^FPCWT Fear) WHERE APE Tk-e, UPB 9K7 DOWNS? WHERE 
IS %vWEIGHT? WHAfs Tk^ DREED? CHARACTER. ? DIFFERENCES IN BUILD? 



A FOUR LEGGED WALK 

Has two ma in 

extreme - 

faAG&FEATfsD) 


PELVIS up CHEST TOWN 


m$tfT£Hwiv&z 

?up.'UE!^ pem 



F£lVIS J3oWN 


9tiouu>m 


i 



THe- H&P 'Tom 
DOWN AS Ike. 
CM05r GPU S VOWF 


Tie. H&PCCMSS. UF 
SUGHTW i-ATEfZ 
THAU "fife- GHf&r 
PSIAYBP ZOZ*hm. 


BUT WITH TWO SETS CF LESS WORKING, THERMS A LOT CF WEIGHT 7 RANBFPRENCE GOINS CM- 
WHERE The. WEIGHT IS COMING FROM/ WHERE IT /S W WHERE ITS GOING TO. 


327 




















IF WE X PE GOING To BE ^PeAUSTC HI OttZ ACPCN WERE GOING TO HAVE TO DO RESEARCH* 
HOW ike AH/MAP IS BUILT Itk £/7£ Wt YPE^ WATCHING WATCHING UNTIL WfKNOW IT 


i LIVE ACftOM REFERENCE 

_i ■ ■ ■ ■_i -- ■■■ — ■»■■■■■ ■■ 



Qmt>Y FILM w VIDEO W Ike. TATRA OZPlNARY MU YBZlpGE PHOTOS of ANIMALS 
ums u) LOWS W CHANGING MUSCLE SHAPES ARB Cism DiSFUYEP AG&NST BACKSROJMD 



A MAESlPQ OF ANIMAL. ACTION , MILT HAUL SAIL HE PIP THOROUGH RESEARCH ON ANIMALS 
'bd ALWAYS DlD. HE SAIL HE SPENTHUNDREDS OFHOU& S JUP/fNG ACTONS OF VARIOUS ANIMALS 
fan) WALKS eod RONS" WHA (75 HAPPENING ~ WHEPETke WRIGHTIS HOW YOU DRAW THEM,. HESAID 

he vmrTHm theft wm, an e§t of arriving at THgFJHiNes: vye just havf ToGoimcm 1 

M *LT SWORE SYlh'&.MDYBWSE BOOKS. - PbuHP Ihm EVEN B&T& THAN FW, BECAUSE OF ikt GRUB. 
Km HARRIS ALSO GWZE RY MUYBRIDGE. HE BOILED POWN A SIMPLE FORMULA - 



& 


Mums all walk 
basically alike 

■f 

B (f TAKE DRAWING 


H@\p tufns WITH -O^^GA/WSr- 
Iht frost roar Acrtott 


Tkt tail SCOT MOV& ml IfaTS&T 
WITH SACK Less ACTS HKEA WHIP. 


imp OQ'SiPmrm 



TAIL FROM AEO'/e. 


Twee most animal walks are pmtf similar , if weunv&stand % walk cfa medium built 
animal lake a horse, log or large cat wf can apply Hig same Knowledge to oiwz animals 
Of pending on their Site, weight, design timing' ih&iHTEivAiScF Thee iwumdmg> 

' f we Get do wn on all fours we can feel how they wank * 


A PASS 
* R>S 



Cotta^T 


ccHwcr 


^r 


t ?m 

ros 



contact 


cc*J iMr 


328 



















































































































ASziwmw hmP 
m Qumm 



A WALK um AN Ogt&tCH AN b A MAM? 



T>cm m osr&otf and a man m (A\JA uk&a horse? 


329 





























AFPwtt&io MosrAMmi&- ws AMEEim size mg- 

THEE& 5 0 MUCH Qom Obi THAT COLO)f& HELP - 


J2- maw brumes. - 



saack/w 

(2*ff?CJS 



Ka> px, 

pas-s. m 



&{.(]}% w 



ml 


S(At£ RJft 






cewrAC] 



CW$T+ 

StfOlWE 

up 


Pfei MS 
pO Wti 





CONVICT 


ho u>m uttfoiMii 



330 





























































I {ft* 


e -. 


P/tf£ 'TWf27S' 
€ IDE io £/0t 
PUfZtNGr 
~fU& iVAl-K; 




PWfiS 

POffH 


fts 


vm 

as 11S uFTms 


^ c-otfTacr 




avesr^ 

^/wj^aas 1 

pawn 


LfFT 

£HO£JW® 


pbww 


Ctf/mcr 


PELVIS 

UP 

f 


A7 



Pgp/*S 'MS TK3S 

DO’^f/ PASS as !?S u?rm 



gACKTS>(f) 





< 


331 























































h£!Z£2 A f=UMNY 'fNVSftret/ WAUKOH A OH Tw'CS - WALK/M S DM 16 s. }T$ FLAMBP WlTtf^FgytT LBG »x) 

'k oppcsm BKK 'Twimrisr-TAKtfks -fifcSr^Tassrt/e?. i%<l Fxre&m*! »J *n A& level *dih& P4S8MS Pc&ffiCH *L 

3 *) fi&t> AZa BAKED SU@HW. 'll ie CCHW /S OJV ^5 ^ <« # A3. SAMfl^ BsLie/ABLB f KlXTNO AHKML WAiHS Ll^iyiS. 



13 m fi ie* /jP 


/S 


exrssMs (fa 








332 
















































































































DIRECTING 


/ twa/k rmz£ ape omit a few msomur twa/gs to khow ascot pu&ctmg - 
but we've (Sot to mm those, 

’Iht ptRECTOSSJOB (STD MAKE tr ALA W(XK- i HAVE THEBE &UL£S : 

CD ;&£ SIMPLE. 

® SE cleat: 

dp put mzrrum m£f& you em see tr 


~fl(t DIKeCtdR- is AT FACED CREATURE WIW A foot IN % CAMPS. Ih^SfUMOM PtmM (77 


DO &COP 

WOEK- 

fctj D£4W FASTER 



ik<L FfiONT TCQ1A 


TUt, /SACK Room 


333 










































































































t* 


ITS NOT A BUSINESS ITS AN EXPRESSION i 

HAWKINS (jAN/MATWQ 


irk a busing, god PAm (r! 

A avow. zx&umvz) 

OF CoUR ST irk BOTH ' BUT DO YOU KNOW %& GOLDEN RULE' 

m dryer has tU*. ceold aaakes nub rules, 

MERE' BEING HIRED TO pQ A JDS W WE SHOULD DO WHAT W^RE BEING Hi BED TO DO. WE SHOULD 
=OLLOW ike tOl£&> IF WE WANT ARTISTIC FREEDOM THEN WE PROVIDE OUR OWN GOLD. 


I H^ERIBFJ /s SO MPonml l ALWAYS WRITE ON ONE SHEET OF ftAFFR. WHAT Tie GOALS ARE - WHAT 

K - y WFrf SUPPOSED TO DO. FO/Z EXAMPLE, ike'WHO FRAMED ROGEfR RABBIT " FtLN\- 

FIRST, MAKEikt MAtPJAGEOF LWFACTION m) CARTOON REALMS BLEND TOGETHER TONV/NCI NCR/- 

second f use (3 Dism articulation 

(£) WARNER TYPE CHARACTERS 
© 7.EX AVERY HUMOUR C^HT NOT SO gfiMt] 

OUF JOB IS TO ALLAY Th* FEARS Oplkt- EXECUTIVES ^x) INCITE CREED BY OJtt TALENT DISPLAY- 
SOLVING iht, PROBLEMS UP FRONT DESIGN 7 ae CWFF CP SELECT WUATO GOOD tod ’CHOW IT WORKS. 


tt LEICA REEL 


Oft ANIMATiC, OF FILMED COLOUR STORYBOARD WILD SHOW WUATS WORDING - (AND 
WHAT ICblf) ITS SOMETHING FOR EVERYONE TO HANG THEIR RAT ON CALM DOWN/. 
THEN WE MAKE Iht CHANGES. Td THAI LEiCA R0L - NOTTO The ANIMATION . 7 M WAY Iht ANIMATORS 
GAN CtET ON WITH THEIR WORK IN SOME KIND OF PEACE. 


separate Ik* characters. ) show ikt difference RmEErrmi _ 

—— ---—' GlZESf SHAPES , CQLOV&, VOICES. PUTOPPOStTEB TOGETHER 

LITTLE. FATdJ THlN. THDLDw) SHORT, ROUND 2HU SQUARE, OLD YOUNG, RICH to\c> POOR 


334 

































































































77//s is so very important! A successful exampleis DiSNFYS lion king whepe 
A tLTfa creatures sound, look w behave Quite differently mw each other. 

PUT ihe, BEST AH/MATO&S OH the. O PEN I MG f ENDING W AO 
Pi LEAPS SPOTTED THROUGH The* mi EPEE - LIKE Across WHO 
KNOW 1H IMPORTANCE Of STAGE ENTRANCES W EXITS, Ptfrfk&'BEST PEOPLE OH 
CLOSE UPC ShG LONG SCENES, LESS EXPERIENCED PEOPLE ON 3 FOOTOHGCHOT 

m middle people iNitro muddle. 



casting animators 


EVERYBODY HAS THE NOTHING ‘THEY DO WELL , Ilk CURJcS TO 
CAST -THEM FOE WHAT THEY CAN DO W NOT 'WHAT THEY CANT DO. 



UNLESS THEY'RE ASKING ETC HELP/ ALLOW Ike, ANIMATOR To GTE 
Blim UNIMPEDED. ONCE 71 W& PREmMT WITH A NEW S CENE 


THEY WONT MIND MAKING CHANGE to A PREVIOUS ONE, WERE ALL The. & 4 /H£. 


Keep Ikt Door open fop comtrruvcns fsm everyone on ittTmi, 

IF You CATCH THEM M OTTERING, ASK THEM To*$W!$AY!"Wf MStT 

&e mw about something. 



IE YOU CAST The, RIGHT AOVK FoKTk^JOB //s The, EASIEST THING 
IN the WOPiD. THEY'LL USUALLY GIVE IT TO YOU ON TAKE ONE. 

Them just get another take for insurance. Actually they'll usuauy give it to 
Y ou oh the Rehearsal - So tellTU Recordist to record everything, its only if 

YOU HAVEN T MADE CLEAR WHATS REQUIRED THAT YOU CAN END UP WITH FIFTY TAKES . 

Hook- ufsj its our respondibilhY to ensure that one animators shot near 
~ up perfectly to riv^ next persons shot, therfs no accuse for 



AN ANIMATION DIRECTOR TO GETTHlS WRONG 4 C WE CAN DRAW PERFECT MATCH -UPS. 
FFSEARCl 7 ) VERY, VERY, VERY IMPORTANT RESEARCH EVERYTHING TILL YOU KNOW 

The, subject inside out. Don't WING IT 

WE SHOULD KNOW EDITING TECHNIQUES . / STUD Y AKIRA KUROSAWA 
The, JAPANESE DIRECTOR, WHO I THINK is fkc WORLD'S GREATEST EDI7DR 
AS WELL AS DIRECTOR r 



ANOTHER GREAT THING AROur KUROSAWA IS THAT 

he Relieves in his material . HE trusts the 
Audience trusts himself to tell his story d»3 allows ike, audience 

TO COME TO ikt FlLhA. So ASA DIRECTOR YOU HAVE TV BELIEVE IN YxiR MATERIAL. 



335 




it's AMAVnG WHAr YOU CM GET AWAY W/7?/, 

AM J/V'm&TWS THING HAPPENED ON ^MO FRAMED ROGER RABB/T " 

THfACxOR, BOS HC&mS HAD A GR&KTABil-ITY TO CONCENTRATE OH A N ON-DISTANT 
TAmr WHO WAS g TERT H f&H - MOSTACOSS WHO (jQDKTHROUGH O/OFAST 

~tke INVISIBLE CHANACj&Z, BOB COUBP STOP HiS &YEB £ ISHTATTUo 3 FOOT BINE 
meRE The. ra BBrrS F(fS would iB£. 

One pay animate Smcn wfus (ndin a itp p\pfcad) caw Mtoiae and said, 
"m'vE 6c t A ppcpb&w - poSms i$ booking- Ar a 6 Poor mm rabbit- what po 

m DO? HE WAS fcASHT HOSKINS HAD TFMPORA&PN BA PS ED AND WAS BOOKING 
TALKING To A AW L A£OWT 6 fWT CFFTRe GROUND. 



Ikt BABeiTi 
$<iPP0<&D7O8& 

Raw Hm*. 




I TttO&tT, v W^ftte PABBlfs GOT THEBE HUGE FEET- BETS JUST STRETCH H/IA 
UPON HISTOEO A&AidSr TA*. WALL'. " FOR HO REASON?' ' WHAT 0 POE ARE WF 
GfOiMO TO DO? THE RABBfTS NEURCmC, - IT SHOUBP WORK*' 



THF/ WEN USED 
TU& SHOT (N ~fUsL 

fRoYcromo trailers 

AND NO OHF 0/m 
<QUBSTtONF€> T 


































/ ,4fAVAY£ Sf<£-rcH ZVg&YV-iltiG OUT SMALL FKSf. "fl'c LITTLE T£Atf!%3$, 3£CW$fc 1ti€fZE -#AW/«3 Cf^W 

gggA'I -ro SHOW fC£A K W32KfcV6 Ci^tjglV ££ AtjT: 


&vtyL(C 


fc n. i . ; T ; . ; .w:-: :.*+■:■>:■ 

FuU^q 


337 





































































































































AND IN CONCLUSION: He, REVIEW ' 


The, PROCEDURE 



75 MAKE Ik SOUP'- 


. i- —- B j >-■ f ■-*-■■ ■ 


Storyboard C De ^ mep ?&*■ zougu') 


pi-Mme 



U-BAbS. TO 
f 

TEST The'L £1 Ca‘ REEL or. 'ANlMATIO at FlMED blDRYBOARD 

i-BAITS.lt> 

± 

SrS Planning drawings («sw*sM*iwme««*) 

-fuss Cim- umBfisiAup m oF&yer 

MAN &IM PQS 



rest (Key 


FDZ\TtOH§ 

The. S!Q DRAWINGS OR f(%ITtOMS ThiAT !W£ To 


7^r PXT^M^ - AMYOW&Z F&§mCNS THAT HAVE _ lb EB THERE, 

-US.UAU-Y ' CONTACTS’ 

test Pacing Positions Ppmmps just >n rnmn) 




spotttNieok 

Flow 


ad WE CAN 
KE&Ot 



JX> S&fERAL- SX&AX3MT MiEAb PONS 

■ ike, p&ma&v rnm 

~%e. SFCONOARy TV IMG 
ike. TWRP TV/NG 
%, FOUCfh -THING 


AW OTHZPC BITS 


OIKP PHAFPY 
PAIR 
rAT 

TAI/S &k 



338 























(j7fc 


IN<38£C>mKTS 



An d To to 7W& wefee uSfMS ; 

<Eoot k&s foR, charity 

WEIGHT - 'CHANGE' t*) ANTICIPATION. 

To Get FtextBitiry: 

ovbouppm action ’ - \ 



W (Vf'& WS//Y<5 Successive BREAKING OF JOINTS 

ACCENTS - //#£>, g^py, /ma/££ / f^jet 

(azrwHm &wy) 

StAGG&B VIBRATIONS 

Compression aJ PtsrmvoM Ao^mh aj emsrctt) 

PtFfeReHT WAtt^ TvJ RONS - $TP£SSmTk J>H=FE&KE 

BETWEEN THINGS P&DPl-g. 

/ /V VBNTLJP MOVES THAT CANT HAPPEN M He, PEN- WOPU> 

BUT WE MAKE HOOK BELIEVA8UE. 

FoP DIALOGUE W£ ( R£ PPC&msm rr SOMEWHERE- 

sm all cume things eroaplY or very Subtly 


ALLTHlS tsikiL ANATOMY 7D ENABLE OT 72? GlVEjhe, PERFORMANCE. 

Sustain it w) make it compulsive viewing. 

Am once irk all absorbed into tk-e bloodstream- 

To FREE US To EXPRESS 1 , 


The RAYS Itie TM 3. 


/ 


339 















Start with the things that you know and the things that are unknown will be revealed to you. 

Rembrandt, 1606-1669 



A CKNOWLEDG E ME NTS 


Now I know why authors profusely thank their editors! So thanks to Walter Donohue at Faber and Faber 
for daring to think there might be a useful book here and for his enthusiasm and patience as ! struggled 
endlessly to complete. 

And thanks to the production team: Nigel Marsh, Kate Ward and Ron Costley for coping with my 
unorthodox format and crazy demands. Linda Rosenberg of Farrar, Straus and Giroux has been an ener¬ 
getic enthusiast and supporter of the book all the way along. 

I'm aiso very grateful to Roy E. Disney who has helped me in many different ways. 

The Disney Studio has been very generous and co-operative as they always have been during my life-long 
one-foot-in and one-foot-out relationship with them. Special thanks to Howard Green for his consistent 
help and encouragement. 

! think the book already shows how much I owe to my teachers and friends: Ken Harris, Art Babbitt, Milt 
Kahl, Emery Hawkins and Grim Natwick. But I want to especially thank Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston 
for their kindness and advice over the years. It's been a privilege to have these men as allies and friends. 

Thanks to author/animator John Canemaker for his advice and long term support. My 25 year collabora¬ 
tor Roy Naisbitt saved the old artwork i would have thrown out and that's why we have the illustrations. 
Thanks Roy. Animator/director Neil Boyle started out as my protege and ended up giving me sound 
advice over the three and a half years it's taken. Catharine and Andy Evans at Dimond Press went far 
beyond the call of duty as we pushed their laser copier to its limits. Thanks to Chris Hill for his help with 
the computer images on the cover. 

I want to thank my son, animator Alex Williams for constantly telling me the book will be useful. My old 
school friend, animator Carl Bell has been helping me with stuff for years. Also my friend, author Ralph 
Pred, has been extremely stimulating and encouraging. 

My photographer friend Frank Herrmann took the early photographs. Thanks Frank. The 'old man' photos 
are by Jacob Sutton. Thanks, Jake. Thanks to builder Dennis Nash for building me an inventive place to 
work on the book. 

And thanks go to the following who all helped in different ways - Chris Wedge, Tom Sito, Morten 
Thorning, Miguel Fuertes, Jane Miller, Nicola Solomon, Sue Perotto, Dean Kalman Lennert, Di McCrindie, 
Lyn Naisbitt, Julie Kahl, Heavenly and Scott Wilson, Phil and Heather Sutton, John Ferguson, Ted and Jill 
Hickford, Marilyn and David Dexter, Ellen Garvie, Mallory Pred, Saskia and Rebekah Sutton. 

The cover on page x appears by kind permission of Animation Magazine, Roger Rabbit © Touchstone Pictures and 
Amblin Entertainment, fnc. used by kind permission of Touchstone Pictures and Amblin Entertainment, Inc. The 
photograph is by Jacob Sutton; The photographs on pages 2, 6, 8 and 45 are by Frank Herrmann; The stills on page 
4 and page 10 from The Charge of the Light Brigade © The Charge of the Light Brigade, courtesy of MCM; The 
photograph on page 7 is used by kind permission of Disney Enterprises, Inc.; The stills on pages 18 and 19 from 
Steamboat Willie, The Skeleton Dance, Flowers and Trees, Three Little Pigs and Snow White and the Seven 
Dwarfs are used by kind permission of Disney Enterprises, Inc.; The poster on page 21 is used by kind permission 
of the British Film institute; 'Epitaph of an Unfortunate Artist’ is from the Complete Works of Robert Graves, cour¬ 
tesy of Carcanet Press Limited, 1999; The photograph on page 26 appears by kind permission of Disney Enterprises, 
inc.; The photograph on page 39 ‘Golf Ball Bounce' © Harold Edgerton, courtesy of the Science Photo Library; The 
Bugs Bunny sketch by Ken Harris on page 46 appears by kind permission of Warner Bros.; The photographs on page 
328 are by Eadweard Muybridge, courtesy of the Kingston Museum and Heritage Service; The sketches on page 
336 and page 337 appear by kind permission of Touchstone Pictures and Amblin Entertainment, Inc. 

Every effort has been made to contact or trace all copyright holders. The publishers will be pleased to make good in 
future editions or reprints any omissions or corrections brought to their attention. 


342 



